JACQUES  YALLEE 

BESTSELLING  AUTHOR  OF  REVELATIONS 


A COSMIC  SAM 


FPT 


$18.00 
$24.50 
in  Canada 


In  January  1990,  following  a wave  of  reported  UFO 
sightings  in  the  Soviet  Union,  renowned  UFO 
investigator  Dr.  Jacques  Valiee  and  Martine 
Castello,  a science  reporter  for  the  prestigious 
French  newspaper  Le  Figaro,  took  an  extraor- 
dinary journey  to  Moscow  to  meet  with  the 
major  Soviet  researchers  of  UFO  and  other 
paranormal  activities.  During  their  visit,  they 
had  unprecedented  access  to  a wide  range  of 
officials,  prominent  Soviet  scientists,  and  rep- 
resentatives of  the  Moscow  media  and  Soviet 
technology  community. 

The  frankness  of  the  exchange  and  the  aston- 
ishing scope  of  revelations  about  UFO  sightings, 
landings,  personal  abductions,  disappearances,  and 
reappearances  took  Dr.  Valiee  and  Castello— 
as  well  as  many  Soviet  officials— by  surprise. 
What  they  heard  had  never  been  said  in  the  West. 
Indeed,  some  of  what  they  heard  had  never  been 
revealed  publicly  in  the  Soviet  Union. 

Now  in  UFO  Chronicles  of  the  Soviet  Union: 
A Cosmic  Samizdat,  Dr.  Valiee  presents  his  first- 
person  from-the-field  report  on  UFO  activity  in 
the  Soviet  Union  and  the  findings  of  Soviet  UFO 
research.  Not  since  Psychic  Discoveries  Behind 
the  Iron  Curtain  was  published  more  than  twenty 
years  ago  has  the  West  had  such  a revealing 
glimpse  of  paranormal  activity  and  investiga- 
tion in  the  Soviet  Union.  But  much  more  than 
an  update,  UFO  Chronicles  of  the  Soviet  Union: 
A Cosmic  Samizdat,  provides  never-before- 
available,  glasnost-era  entree  to  the  Soviet  UFO 
archives.  Featuring  a case  index  of  anomalies 
and  close  encounters  in  the  Soviet  Union,  this  is 
a major  contribution  to  our  knowledge  about 
alien  contact. 


DATE  DUE 


DEMCO,  INC.  38-2931 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


A COSMIC  SAMIZDAT 


ALSO  BY  JACQUES  VALLEE 
PUBLISHED  BY  BALLAIMTINE  BOOKS 

CHALLENGE  TO  SCIENCE 
ANATOMY  OF  A PHENOMENON 

THE  ALIEN  CONTACT  TRILOGY: 

DIMENSIONS 

CONFRONTATIONS 


REVELATIONS 


UFO  CHRONICLES 

SOVIET  UNION 

A COSMIC  SAMIZDAT 


Jacques  Vallee 


in  collaboration  with 
MARTINE  CASTELLO 


BALLANTINE  BOOKS 


NEW  YORK 


Copyright  ® 1992  by  Jacques  Vallee 

All  rights  reserved  under  International  and  Pan-American 
Copyright  Conventions.  Published  in  the  United  States  by 
Ballantine  Books,  a division  of  Random  House,  Inc.,  New  York, 
and  simultaneously  in  Canada  by  Random  House 
of  Canada  Limited,  Toronto. 

Maps  and  illustrations  rendered  by  Patrick  O’Brien 

Library  of  Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data 
Vallee,  Jacques 

UFO  chronicles  of  the  Soviet  Union  : a cosmic  Samizdat  / 
Jacques  Vallee  in  collaboration  with  Martine  Castello. 
p.  cm. 

Includes  index. 

ISBN  0-345-37396-0 

1.  Unidentified  flying  objects — Sightings  and  encounters — 
Soviet  Union.  I.  Castello,  Martine.  II.  Title. 
TL789.V348  1992 

001. 9 '42 '0947 — dc20  91-55504 

CIP 


Designed  by  Ann  Gold 

Manufactured  in  the  United  States  of  America 
First  Edition:  March  1992 


10  987654321 


samizdat:  a definition 


Samizdat  is  a Russian  word  for  a document  that  is 
secretly  copied  by  individuals  to  be  circulated  among 
trusted  friends.  For  a long  time,  the  works  of  Solzhe- 
nitsyn and  Pasternak  circulated  in  samizdat  form.  So 
did  many  Western  works  that  were  not  approved  by 
the  government,  including  books  about  UFOs  and 
parapsychology. 

The  situation  in  the  former  Soviet  Union  is  chang- 
ing, but  even  today  the  major  sources  of  documenta- 
tion on  this  subject  are  barely  readable  carbon  copies 
of  the  reports  and  commentaries  that  a few  dedicated 
Soviet  researchers  have  been  collecting.  This  book  is 
a tribute  to  their  perseverance  and  courage. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


In  January  1990,  in  the  opening  days  of  a new  de- 
cade, I had  the  opportunity  to  take  an  extraordinary 
journey  to  Moscow  for  an  unprecedented  series  of 
meetings  with  the  major  researchers  of  the  UFO  mys- 
tery in  the  Soviet  Union. 

As  anyone  who  has  traveled  there  knows,  nothing 
happens  easily  or  by  chance.  My  trip  with  Martine 
Castello  was  no  exception  to  that  rule.  Therefore  we 
have  many  people  to  thank  for  helping  us  make  this 
voyage  of  exploration  a successful  reality.  Primary 
among  them  are  our  families,  who  gave  us  the  support 
we  certainly  needed  as  we  embarked  from  Charles  de 
Gaulle  Airport  on  a bleak  winter  day. 

On  the  Western  side,  our  colleagues  in  high  tech- 
nology and  journalism  encouraged  us  to  attack  the 
many  obstacles  that  seemed  to  block  our  way.  With- 
out the  active  support  of  Louis  Pauwels  and  Philippe 
Jost  at  Le  Figaro,  the  most  basic  arrangements  could 
not  have  been  made.  The  fact  that  we  could  travel  to 
the  Soviet  Union  under  the  flag  of  the  most  widely 
read  newspaper  in  France  opened  many  doors. 

On  the  Soviet  side,  we  are  most  grateful  to  the  of- 
ficials of  Novosti  and  to  our  interpreters — Genya  and 


vii 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Serge  in  particular — who  braved  the  difficulties  cre- 
ated by  our  ignorance  of  their  country,  as  well  as  the 
complexities  of  their  own  system,  to  make  our  stay  in 
Moscow  enjoyable  and  productive.  In  particular, 
Vice-Chairmaif  Vladimir  Milyutenko  gave  us  unprec- 
edented access  to  a wide  range  of  officials  and  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Moscow  media  and  of  Soviet 
technology.  It  is  thanks  to  him,  in  particular,  that  we 
had  the  opportunity  to  meet  with  Vladimir  Migulin, 
who  occupies  the  chair  of  radiophysics  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Moscow,  and  with  several  other  esteemed  So- 
viet scientists. 

We  treasure  the  new  friendships  we  were  able  to 
establish  among  Soviet  UFO  experts  during  our  visit. 
Professor  Vladimir  Azhazha  was  kind  enough  not  only 
to  answer  our  questions  about  his  research  but  to  or- 
ganize a very  gracious  dinner  at  his  home  in  Moscow 
to  permit  us  to  extend  our  conversations  with  his  as- 
sociates on  an  informal  basis.  Cosmonaut  Valentin 
Zudov  took  time  from  a busy  training  schedule  to  ex- 
plain the  purpose  and  structure  of  the  City  of  the  Stars 
and  the  complexities  of  the  Mir  space  station.  Science 
writer  Alexander  Kazantsev  received  us  graciously  at 
his  home,  as  did  parapsychologists  Eugene  and  Lar- 
issa Kolessov,  two  representatives  of  the  Soviet  New 
Age.  Boris  Churinov  and  his  associates  at  the  Twenty- 
First  Century  Group  in  Moscow  provided  a source  of 
excellent  data  and  good  advice.  Dr.  M.  Chevtchenko, 
mathematician  Serge  Bozhich,  and  other  scientists 
helped  us  to  become  oriented  in  the  rich  and  bewil- 
dering world  of  Soviet  UFO  research. 

To  those  field  investigators  and  researchers  from  re- 
mote regions  who  made  a special  effort  to  attend  our 
conferences  in  Moscow — Professor  Alexis  Zolotov,  who 


viii 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


came  from  Kalinin;  mining  engineer  Emil  Bachurin, 
who  came  from  Perm  in  the  Urals  (a  two-hour  flight); 
and  the  representatives  of  the  Voronezh  collective  (en- 
gineer Alexander  Mosolov,  chief  engineer  Vyacheslav 
Martynov,  and  Dr.  Yuri  Lozovtsev) — wu  express  our 
sincere  thanks  and  our  best  wishes  on  their  future 
research. 

There  were  many  kind  and  helpful  people  who  as- 
sisted us  during  the  trip:  photographers,  artists,  trans- 
lators, drivers,  scientists  who  attended  the  final 
symposium,  and  others  who  simply  came  out  of  the 
crowd  to  reveal  their  experiences  and  to  describe  their 
work.  Unfortunately,  we  were  too  rushed  to  be  able 
to  acknowledge  them  individually.  But  they  should 
know  that,  even  if  we  were  not  able  to  note  all  their 
names,  we  have  forgotten  neither  their  kindness  nor 
their  hospitality. 

The  subject  of  UFOs  divides  Soviet  scientific  opin- 
ion just  as  much  as  it  does  the  Western  public.  To 
highlight  this  controversy,  I have  presented  selected 
quotes  from  both  sides  before  every  chapter  in  the  text. 

During  the  writing  of  this  book  several  Western  ex- 
perts helped  me  in  sorting  through  the  mass  of  mate- 
rial we  had  brought  back  from  Moscow  and  to  prepare 
it  for  publication.  Special  thanks  are  due  to  Larissa 
Vilenskaya  of  the  Defense  Language  Institute  in  Mon- 
terey for  her  gracious  help  with  Russian  texts.  My 
agent,  Ned  Leavitt,  provided  valuable  advice,  and 
Emery  Reiff  did  outstanding  work  with  a manuscript 
in  which  complicated  spelling,  transcribed  from  the 
Cyrillic,  presented  an  unusual  challenge  to  word  pro- 
cessing. 

In  that  regard,  I must  confess  that,  in  the  interest 
of  readability,  I have  not  followed  rigid  standards  in 


x 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


the  transliteration  of  Russian  names.  Instead  I have 
tried  to  simplify  them  while  retaining  their  most  com- 
mon form  of  pronunciation,  and  I have  taken  the  lib- 
erty of  anglicizing  many  first  names. 

— Jacques  Vallee 
August  1991 


x 


CONTENTS 


1. 

The  Glasnost  Wave 

3 

2. 

Culture  Shock 

16 

3. 

Rules  of  Engagement 

26 

4. 

The  Voronezh  Collective 

40 

5. 

The  Voronezh  Investigations 

53 

6. 

Tunguska:  The  Continuing  Enigma 

62 

7. 

For  the  Record:  A Brief  History  of 

Soviet  Ufology 

74 

8. 

Biolocation:  Can  UFO  Anomalies 

Be  Detected  by  Humans? 

87 

9. 

An  Evening  with  Alexander  Kazantsev 

98 

10. 

City  of  the  Stars 

106 

11. 

Underground:  Conversations  Around  a 
Bottle  of  Vodka 

115 

12. 

The  Secret  Chronicles 

130 

13. 

The  Perm  Expeditions 

140 

X 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


14. 

The  View  from  Academe 

153 

15. 

Turning  a Page  in  the  Book  of  Science 

163 

Conclusion 

177 

Appendix  1:  A Preliminary  Catalog  of 
Soviet  UFO  Sightings 

182 

Appendix  2:  Case  Index 

196 

Notes 

203 

Index 

207 

X 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


A COSMIC  SAMIZDAT 


CHAPTER  1 


THE  CLASIMOST  WAVE 


Some  people  prefer  to  remain  in  a narrow  circle  of 
known  concepts.  They  regard  anything  new  as  a para- 
dox. It  is  always  the  same  thing:  those  people  who  try 
to  gain  new  insights  into  nature  are  always  viewed  as 
an  oddity,  as  a paradox. 

Ernest  Chladny, 

eighteenth-century  Russian  pioneer 
in  meteoritics 


This  adventure  began  for  me  on  October  8,  1989, 
with  a phone  call  from  a Wall  Street  Journal  editor 
who  knew  of  my  interest  in  unidentified  flying  ob- 
jects. I was  working  in  my  study  at  home  in  San  Fran- 
cisco, when  the  phone  rang  and  my  friend  told  me 
she  had  just  noticed  a dispatch  that  had  come  across 
her  Teletype.1 

An  editor  with  the  political  department  of  the  Jour- 
nal, she  was  fluent  in  Russian  and  conversant  with 
developing  events  in  Gorbachev’s  Soviet  Union. 
Therefore  I paid  close  attention  when  she  added:  “The 
New  York  Times  will  be  running  this  tomorrow  on  the 
front  page.  It  comes  from  Tass  through  the  office  of 
the  Associated  Press  in  Moscow.  It’s  a landing  report 


3 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


from  Russia.  The  sighting  happened  some  time  at  the 
end  of  last  month.  I thought  you  should  see  it  right 
away.” 

A few  minutes  later  the  full  page  appeared  on  my 
facsimile  machine.  It  described  some  extraordinary 
events  in  the  Soviet  Union,  but  the  wording  of  the  text 
was  even  more  remarkable. 

The  Tass  dispatch  ran  this  way:  “Scientists  have 
confirmed  that  an  unidentified  flying  object  recently 
landed  in  the  Russian  city  of  Voronezh.”  (Voronezh  is 
located  almost  three  hundred  miles  south  of  Moscow.) 
“The  scientists  have  also  explored  the  landing  site  and 
found  traces  of  aliens  who  made  a short  promenade 
about  the  park.” 

The  Tass  report  went  on  with  the  assertion  that  a 
large  shining  ball  or  disk  had  been  seen  hovering  over 
the  park.  Several  residents  said  they  watched  the  UFO 
land  and  three  creatures,  similar  to  humans,  emerge, 
accompanied  by  a small  robot.  “The  aliens  were  ten 
to  thirteen  feet  tall,  but  with  very  small  heads,”  one 
witness  reported.  “They  walked  near  the  ball  or  disk 
and  then  disappeared  inside.” 

The  report  also  mentioned  that  a team  of  scientists, 
including  Professor  Genrikh  Silanov,  of  the  Geophys- 
ical Institute  in  Voronezh,  was  studying  the  case,  and 
that  the  path  followed  by  the  aliens  had  been  ascer- 
v/  tained  “through  the  use  of  biolocation.”  The  people 
who  had  seen  the  aliens  “were  overwhelmed  by  a fear 
which  lasted  for  several  days.” 


4 


THE  CLASNOST  WAVE 


THE  NEW  YORK  TIMES 
MISSES  A GOOD  STORY 

Release  of  the  Voronezh  sighting  data  created  a re- 
markable journalistic  flap;  indeed,  sociologists  might 
study  it  for  its  implications  about  the  way  the  public 
is  informed  by  the  most  trusted  news  sources. 

By  the  time  the  report  appeared  in  the  New  York 
Times  on  October  9,  the  word  biolocation  had  been  \/ 
garbled  by  the  prestigious  newspaper  to  bilocation, 
which  made  no  sense  whatsoever.  The  editors  had 
failed  to  realize  that  biolocation  was  a special  term  in 
Soviet  psychotronic  literature  that  designates  dows- 
ing, or  radiesthesia,  the  detection  of  hidden  mineral, 
water,  or  living  entities  by  paranormal  means.  Dows- 
ers often  use  a pendulum,  a rod,  or  a stick  for  such 
work. 

The  Soviets  seemed  to  be  saying  that  they  had  a 
team  of  official  scientists  studying  UFOs  using  the 
techniques  of  parapsychology.  That  was  clearly  the 
real  story,  yet  the  American  press,  led  by  the  Times, 
missed  it.  Not  only  did  they  miss  it,  but  they  quickly 
garbled  the  few  verifiable  facts  beyond  all  recogni- 
tion. They  ridiculed  the  story  instead  of  researching 
it. 

That  was  only  the  beginning. 

Over  the  next  few  days  an  incredible  display  of  ig- 
norance, confusion,  arrogance,  and  plain  stupidity 
spread  over  the  Western  press.  The  Soviet  media,  in- 
ebriated with  the  new  freedom  of  glasnost,  or  open- 
ness, did  not  fare  much  better.  In  fact,  as  American 
journalists  commented  with  glee,  it  was  as  if  Moscow 
had  suddenly  discovered  the  joys  of  tabloids  and  wal- 


5 


North  Sea 


1 -r\rv*  I />. 

f ~ 7~**y~  ~M  ^ rrl 

• POLAND^  fonega 

BERLIN  # J LENINGRAD  W Lak% 


WARSAW  / 

' • KALININ 

MOSCOW* 


• GORKY  /K 

# •VORONEZH  PERM 

Jrft 


I 

V 

\ • 

/ KIEV 

J 

/ v 

KHARKOV 

*Black^ 

Sea 

• ROSTOV-NA-DONU 
KERCyft?  KRASNODAR 

4 Vl 

trz.  4 Caucasus  Mountains 

SOTCHI-Sri 

^^naltchikJI 

TURKEY  '^Tbilisi 

YEREVAN>^l^Sea 
”?/ BAKU  7*9 

IRAN 


V-  • SVERDLOVSK 
'•  MAGNITOGORSK 


E Ara/  Sea 


Lake 

Balkhash 


ALMA*ATA 


r i i i i i i i i 

0 200  400  600  800  Miles 


TASHKENT 

TEHRAN  .^  V'\*ASHKHABAD  # 

DUSHANBE  r4j ' 

V*  r>  S CHIN, 


) r+\ 


AFGHANISTAN 


Fig.  1.  Map  of  the  western  part  of  the  Soviet  Union. 


lowed  in  their  newfound  ability  to  confuse  facts  with 
utter  fiction. 

Instead  of  investigating  and  clarifying  the  original 
claim,  radio  and  television  stations  around  the  world 
hastily  consulted  some  self-styled  experts  whose  sole 
expertise  consisted  of  turning  the  sighting  into  a joke. 


6 


THE  CLASNOST  WAVE 


Thus,  skeptic  Paul  Kurtz,  Chairman  of  the  Commit- 
tee for  the  Scientific  Investigation  of  Claims  of  the 
Paranormal,  commented  that  the  reports  were  largely 
uncorroborated.  “In  a closed  society  such  as  the  Soviet 
Union,”  he  said,  shooting  from  the  hip,  “you  don’t  get 
the  development  of  critical  reason.”2 

Everybody  jumped  into  the  act  with  cartoons, 
jokes,  and  superficial  comments.  Science  fiction  writer 
Ben  Bova,  president  of  the  National  Space  Founda- 
tion, was  quoted  as  saying  he  wished  the  aliens  were 
still  there  and  were  holding  a press  conference. 

To  conclude  its  article  on  the  Voronezh  affair,  the 
Waterbury,  Connecticut,  Republican  was  unable  to 
refrain  from  interviewing  a local  bartender  who 
claimed  “he’s  served  his  share  of  aliens,”  adding  that 
the  beings  seen  in  Voronezh  must  have  come  from 
Naugatuck,  where  they  make  their  homes.  “That’s 
why  Naugatuck  High  used  to  have  such  a good  bas- 
ketball team.” 

On  San  Francisco  radio  station  KCBS,  Kurtz  openly 
mocked  what  he  called  the  lack  of  hard  evidence, 
pointing  out  that  two  strange  rocks  reportedly  found 
by  the  Soviets  at  the  site  sounded  to  him  like  simple 
pieces  of  outer  space  excrement.  In  other  words,  alien 
shit.  Another  so-called  expert  pointed  out  that  if  such 
an  event  had  actually  happened.  President  Mikhail 
Gorbachev  would  have  announced  it  personally — 
because  it  would  have  been  too  important  to  be  left 
to  underlings  like  Professor  Silanov!  For  further  comic 
relief  the  reporter  went  on  to  interview  two  American 
cult  members  from  the  Aetherius  Society,  who  could 
be  counted  on  to  spew  out  weird  tales  about  their 
friendly  space  brothers. 

It  was  all  downhill  from  there. 


7 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Even  the  psychosociological  explanations  flourished 
once  more.  Some  media  authorities  interpreted  the 
sighting  by  saying  that  traditional  Russian  imagina- 
tion had  always  been  “wild”  and  that  the  UFO  story 
expressed  the  Soviet  people’s  need  for  escapism,  which 
had  finally  blown  the  lid  off  the  system  after  long  years 
of  repression. 

The  UFO  research  community  did  not  conduct  it- 
self much  better.  Someone  speaking  for  the  Center 
for  UFO  Studies  in  Chicago,  Illinois,  stated  flatly  that 
his  colleagues  already  knew  the  answer.  “I  am  certain 
this  is  a hoax,”  the  man  was  quoted  as  saying  in  the 
Hartford  Courant.3  He  had  thousands  of  “more  reli- 
able sightings”  in  his  files  that  described  the  space  vis- 
itors as  being  three  to  four  feet  tall  with  large  heads 
and  spindly  bodies.  “The  reports  are  remarkably  sim- 
ilar down  to  the  smallest  of  details,”  he  said,  to  such 
an  extent  that  the  center  now  uses  some  little-known 
details  of  the  aliens’  anatomy  as  a routine  test  of  the 
validity  of  the  sightings.  He  implied  that  the  tall  oc- 
cupants described  in  Voronezh  did  not  fit  the  center’s 
preordained  patterns  and  the  case,  accordingly, 
should  be  summarily  thrown  out. 

The  parade  of  sloppy  reporting  and  loose  thinking 
continued  in  the  following  weeks. 

In  Howard  Blum’s  book  Out  There,  which  pur- 
ported to  reveal  to  the  American  public  the  existence 
of  a group  of  Pentagon  intelligence  experts  secretly 
studying  UFOs,  the  Voronezh  case  was  mentioned  as 
a topic  of  hush-hush  discussion  among  CIA  and  mili- 
tary spooks:  a man  named  Colonel  Phillips  (who,  as 
it  turns  out,  does  not  exist)  was  said  to  be  the  head  of 
this  group  of  top  specialists  in  the  “Great  Game”  of 
espionage.4 


8 


THE  CLASNOST  WAVE 


According  to  Blum,  Colonel  Phillips  suspected  that 
the  incident  never  happened,  but  he  was  curious  about 
the  identification  of  the  landing  site  by  bilocation. 
Could  the  Russians  be  engaged  in  the  same  kind  of 
remote  viewing  studies  American  psychics  have  been 
investigating  for  many  years? 

While  it  is  laughable  to  imagine  that  a group  of 
professional  intelligence  experts  would  leap  to  such 
conclusions  without  bothering  to  refer  to  the  Russian 
text  (which  never  used  the  word  bilocation)  or  even 
without  going  back  to  the  Associated  Press  dispatch, 
we  have  to  consider  the  very  real  possibility  that 
American  UFO  research — including  its  covert  com- 
ponents— has  indeed  fallen  to  such  a sloppy  level. 
Let  us  note  in  passing  that  American  ufology  remains 
nearly  unanimous  in  identifying  flying  saucers  with 
the  idea  of  space  visitors,  despite  mounting  alternative 
data.  Incredibly,  even  the  group  of  Pentagon  tech- 
nocrats described  by  Blum  never  considered  any  other 
possibility. 

On  October  23,  1989,  Newsweek  magazine  pub- 
lished an  article  by  Carroll  Bogert  entitled  “They 
Came  from  Outer  Space — Soviet  Editors  Discover  the 
Power  of  Tabloids.”  Bogert  further  ridiculed  the 
whole  subject,  strongly  suggesting  that  the  story  was 
a hit  with  Soviet  readers  only  because  they  liked  to 
indulge  in  an  age-old  fascination  with  the  occult.5 
Tales  of  flying  saucers  can  be  a welcome  diversion  in 
times  of  economic  crisis  and  food  shortages,  Bogert 
pointed  out.  Furthermore,  even  Soviet  newspapers  in- 
crease their  circulation  by  catering  to  such  weird  tales 
that  make  people  “feel  good.” 

The  overwhelming  majority  of  the  reports  imme- 
diately jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  the  aliens,  if 


9 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


they  did  exist,  had  to  be  from  outer  space.  No  other 
possibility  was  even  discussed.  Thus  the  San  Francisco 
Chronicle  headline:  “Glasnost  Makes  It  Easier  for 
UFOs  to  Touch  Down,  Soviets  Now  Allowing  Space 
Creatures  to  Land.”6  The  article  itself  was  borrowed 
from  the  New  York  Times  and  naturally  reprinted  the 
unfortunate  error  about  bilocation.  No  one  at  the 
Chronicle  bothered  to  check  the  original  Associated 
Press  wire.  The  article  did  mysteriously  define  bilo- 
cation as  “an  extrasensory  method  of  tracking  objects 
or  people  invisible  to  the  human  eye.”  Supreme  gob- 
bledygook. 

The  story  was  so  sensational  that  it  bounced  back 
to  Tass  itself,  once  the  most  staid  and  boring  institu- 
tion of  all  the  world’s  media.  Tass  seemed  to  enjoy  the 
renewed  attention  it  received,  and  it  even  quoted  New 
York  magazine  media  critic  Edwin  Diamond,  who 
asked:  “What  did  the  Academy  of  Sciences  think? 
Where  are  the  pictures?”  It  also  quoted  an  American 
astronomer  who  said  most  U.S.  academics  regarded 
the  story  as  a joke.7 

The  official  consensus  of  Soviet  scientists  was  not 
very  different.  The  Academy  of  Sciences  wisely  re- 
frained from  making  any  comments,  but  a Moscow 
scientist  named  Vladimir  Surdin  did  go  on  record  with 
the  statement  that  the  Voronezh  rumors,  like  all  UFO 
stories,  were  “unscientific.”  Analysis  showed  that  wit- 
nesses often  mistook  jets,  balloons,  bright  planets,  or 
satellites  for  UFOs.  To  put  it  bluntly,  when  they  were 
not  simply  airplanes,  flying  saucers  were  only  as  real 
as  rainbows,  mirages,  or  the  northern  lights.  Surdin 
did  not  quote  a source  for  such  alleged  analysis. 

While  U.S.  would-be  experts  and  the  true  believers 
reacted  flippantly,  it  became  obvious  to  serious  stu- 


10 


THE  GLASNOST  WAVE 


dents  of  the  situation  that  not  only  the  region  of  Vo- 
ronezh but  a large  part  of  Eastern  Europe  was  in  the  ' 
grips  of  a major  wave  that  ranked  in  importance  with 
the  largest  concentrations  of  UFO  sightings  ever  re- 
ported. Instead  of  jumping  to  hasty  conclusions,  the 
National  Center  for  Space  Research  (CNES),  the 
French  equivalent  of  NASA,  took  the  trouble  to  call 
Dr.  Silanov  with  a Russian  interpreter  on  the  line. 
Silanov  verified  the  facts  and  added  that  a full-scale 
scientific  investigation  was  in  progress  in  the  Soviet 
Union,  with  over  forty  witnesses  having  already  been 
interviewed.  In  addition,  a literature  search  turned 
up  a remarkable  pattern. 

SPHERES,  ENTITIES, 

AND  A CURIOUS  SYMBOL 

Until  a large-scale  research  effort  is  mounted  by  our 
Soviet  colleagues,  we  may  not  know  the  true  extent 
of  the  reports.  However,  the  Soviet  wave  may  well 
have  begun  several  months  prior  to  September  1989. 

As  early  as  April  24  of  that  year  an  object  described 
as  “three  times  the  size  of  an  aircraft”  had  flown  over 
Cherepovets.  That  night,  at  10:55  p.m.,  a witness 
named  I.  Veselova  saw  the  object  hovering  a thousand 
feet  in  the  air. 

In  the  Vologda  region  of  central  Russia,  on  June  6, 
1989,  schoolchildren  near  the  village  of  Konantsevo 
saw  a luminous  dot  in  the  sky.  The  dot  became  larger 
and  soon  turned  into  a shining  sphere.  It  landed  in  a 
meadow  and  moved  to  the  nearby  river  as  the  chil- 
dren watched  from  a quarter  mile  away.  The  sphere  y 
then  appeared  to  split  and  “something  resembling  a 
headless  person  in  dark  garb”  appeared,  its  hands 


11 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


reaching  lower  than  its  knees.  The  sphere  and  the 
creature  quickly  became  invisible. 

Three  more  spheres,  some  of  them  associated  with 
entities,  later  landed  in  the  same  meadow. 

On  June  11  at  9:20  p.m.  a woman  named  O.  Lub- 
nina  saw  a fiery  ball  above  Vologda.  It  was  visible  for 
seventeen  minutes. 

During  the  summer  the  newspaper  Socialist  Indus- 
try, which  does  not  have  a reputation  for  publishing 
fanciful  stories,  told  of  a close  encounter  between  a 
milkmaid  named  Lyubov  Medvedev  and  an  alien  in 
the  Perm  region  of  central  Russia.  The  alien  was  a 
j dark  figure,  taller  than  a man,  with  short  legs  and 
only  a small  knob  where  its  head  should  have  been. 
The  figure  reportedly  became  “fluorescent”  and  dis- 
appeared. 

In  mid- July  other  Soviet  citizens  also  observed  aliens 
with  no  heads.  And  a witness  named  G.  Sharoglazov 
saw  two  egg-shaped  fluorescent  objects  as  big  as  air- 
planes hovering  at  a height  of  less  than  a thousand 
feet. 

Even  the  Communist  party  boss  of  the  Chernus- 
chisky  region,  a man  named  V.  Kopylov,  acknowl- 
edged that  “something  unusual  is  going  on  over  our 
two  collective  farms.” 

Other  stories  came  from  the  Korovo  settlement  in 
the  Volga  basin.  A veterinary  surgeon  named  R.  Sai- 
tov  said  he  had  seen  a being  over  six  feet  tall,  its  body 
covered  with  dark  brown  hair.  Saitov  and  a friend 
tried  to  approach  the  creature  after  spotting  it  on  the 
far  bank  of  a pond,  but  it  bounded  away  at  astonish- 
ing speed.  They  got  into  a car  in  an  attempt  to  chase 
it  but  lost  sight  of  it. 

Unfortunately,  Saratov  University’s  biology  depart- 


12 


THE  CLASNOST  WAVE 


ment  refused  to  consider  the  story  or  even  to  speak  to 
the  witness. 

In  Shevchenko,  on  the  Mangyshlak  peninsula  in  the 
Caspian  Sea,  witnesses  saw  an  object  several  times 
larger  than  a passenger  aircraft.  It  vanished  in  the 
clouds  above  the  sea,  although  its  lights  remained  in 
sight  for  a long  time.  On  September  1,  residents  of 
Shevchenko  saw  a “giant  cigar”  that  flew  silently  over 
the  city  and  into  clouds  over  the  water,  its  taillights 
similarly  staying  visible  for  a while. 

Then  came  the  Voronezh  affair  that  suddenly  cap- 
tured the  attention  of  the  world’s  media. 

On  the  night  of  October  11,  1989,  Soviet  television 
viewers  saw  a picture  of  an  alleged  UFO  creature  on 
a news  show  devoted  to  the  Voronezh  landing.  It  was 
a figure  with  two  eyes,  a nose,  and  a broad  mouth 
standing  inside  a glowing,  two-legged  oval  object. 
When  I saw  the  drawing  on  French  television  later 
that  month,  I noticed  how  closely  the  proportions  of 
the  object  resembled  those  of  the  classic  “silvery  egg” 
seen  in  Socorro,  New  Mexico  in  1964.  Like  the  So- 
corro object,  this  one  sported  an  insignia  on  its  side. 
And  the  insignia  was  none  other  than  the  UMMO 
symbol.  During  the  seventies  this  design  had  been  re- 
ported in  several  cases  of  close  encounters  in  Spain 
that  turned  out  to  be  clever  hoaxes  by  a small  cult 
claiming  contact  with  a space  civilization.  What 
was  it  doing  on  an  egg-shaped  craft  in  a Russian 
town? 

At  the  time  this  excitement  was  bubbling  up  in  the 
world  media,  Le  Figaro  had  just  sent  science  reporter 
Martine  Castello  to  California  for  an  analysis  of  the 
claims  of  the  New  Age  movement.8  I met  Martine  in 
San  Francisco,  and  after  a quiet  dinner  with  my  fam- 


13 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


ily  and  friends,  our  conversation  turned  to  the  Voro- 
nezh case.  It  was  during  this  discussion  that  Martine 
and  I discovered  that  we  had  independently  reached 
similar  conclusions  about  the  UFO  problem  in  general 
and  the  UMMO  controversy  in  particular.910  Our  ex- 
perience with  the  inner  workings  of  the  scientific  com- 
munity and  the  media  made  us  suspect  that  beneath 
all  the  ridicule  and  official  denials,  some  very  myste- 
rious and  very  potent  phenomena  were  indeed  being 
observed  in  the  Soviet  Union. 

Clearly,  we  concluded,  the  time  had  come  to  buy 
some  warm  clothes  and  to  arrange  a trip  to  Moscow. 

Even  during  the  era  of  glasnost,  however,  a journey 
to  the  USSR  is  a matter  of  considerable  complexity. 
Our  first  inquiries  fell  on  unsympathetic  Soviet  offi- 
cials. It  turned  out,  fortunately,  that  the  Soviet  press 
agency  Novosti  was  eager  to  work  with  the  Western 
media  and  especially  with  Le  Figaro.  Agency  officials 
would  welcome  our  visit.  What  they  could  not  under- 
stand was  why  we  wanted  to  come  to  Moscow  and 
limit  our  interviews  to  such  silly  concerns  as  UFOs. 
“We  have  so  many  more  important  and  interesting 
scientific  accomplishments  to  show  you!”  they  kept  in- 
sisting. “We  will  take  you  to  our  cosmonaut  training 
center,  the  City  of  the  Stars!  We  will  show  you  our 
latest  developments.” 

We  insisted  that  UFOs  were  our  highest  priority 
and,  skeptical  that  anything  would  develop,  they  re- 
luctantly agreed  to  forward  our  request  to  the  various 
Soviet  research  organizations  they  had  identified.  An 
unforeseen  response  took  place:  the  reaction  was  sim- 
ply overwhelming.  It  seemed  that  dozens  of  individ- 
uals and  groups  wanted  to  talk  with  us.  To  my 
surprise,  I found  that  they  followed  Western  research. 


14 


THE  GLASNOST  WAVE 


which  circulated  in  samizdat  form,  either  Xeroxed  or 
partially  retyped.  Novosti  bowed  to  this  mutual  inter- 
est and  helped  expedite  our  visas.  And  as  Paris  was 
still  in  the  midst  of  the  New  Year’s  festivities,  we 
packed  our  suitcases  and  looked  up  the  airline  sched- 
ule for  direct  flights  to  Sheremetyevo  Airport. 


15 


CHAPTER  2 


CULTURE  SHOCK 


The  nature  of  UFOs  is  unknown.  But  whatever  they 
may  prove  to  be — optical  phenomena  in  the  atmo- 
sphere, probes  from  other  planets,  a new  phenomenon 
of  nature,  or  anything  else — the  study  of  UFOs  should 
begin  with  the  analysis  of  the  reports. 

Professor  Felix  Zigel 
Moscow,  February  1968 

'^ie  depression  that  gradually  engulfs  you  as  you  get 
closer  to  the  Soviet  Union  is  not  an  illusion.  Even 
aboard  the  Air  France  jet,  with  stewardesses  in  smart 
uniforms  serving  champagne  and  lunch  in  impeccable 
style,  one  could  almost  touch  the  thickening  gloom. 
We  had  entrees  over  Amsterdam  and  dessert  over 
Denmark.  But  conversations  became  hushed  when  we 
passed  Riga.  By  the  time  we  taxied  in  the  grayness  of 
the  Moscow  afternoon  we  were  all  bundled  in  coats 
and  mufflers,  smiles  had  disappeared,  and  every  pas- 
senger was  steeling  himself  or  herself  for  the  unavoid- 
able confrontation  with  surly  airport  officials, 
suspicious  customs  agents,  and  the  uncertainty  of  ev- 
erything else. 


16 


CULTURE  SHOCK 


We  stopped  with  a brief  shudder.  Suddenly  every- 
thing was  very  cold  and  bleak.  It  was  as  if  light  itself 
had  been  confiscated.  There  was  a dreary  blanket  over 
the  airport  buildings,  the  dusty  air,  the  people  them- 
selves. It  had  snowed  and  the  snow  had  melted,  pro- 
ducing the  peculiar  black  wetness  of  water  mixed  with 
dirt,  which  is  the  curse  of  most  northern  cities.  After 
five  minutes  our  feet  already  felt  damp.  An  official, 
dressed  in  grayish  green,  fingered  my  passport  and 
started  asking  questions  in  Russian.  I could  only  shake 
my  head  and  review  in  my  mind  the  stern  advice  I 
had  been  given  in  the  West:  what  to  do  if  they  detain 
you;  if  they  confiscate  your  passport;  if  they  harass 
you.  Then  I recognized  my  name  being  called.  Sud- 
denly everything  was  all  right.  An  energetic  young 
man  with  a smile  came  forward,  shook  my  hand,  and 
took  control.  He  introduced  himself  as  Genya,  an  in- 
terpreter from  Novosti.  A few  minutes  later  we  were 
driving  toward  Moscow. 

CAVIAR  AND  FLYING  SAUCERS 

“We  have  prepared  a series  of  meetings  for  you,”  said 
Genya  in  very  fluent  French  as  we  drove  away  from 
the  airport.  “Unfortunately,  as  you  know,  Andrei 
Sakharov  died  just  a few  days  ago.  But  there  are  many 
other  people  who  want  to  see  you.” 

“Will  we  be  able  to  meet  with  the  investigators 
from  Voronezh?”  I asked  him. 

“Four  of  them  have  promised  to  come  to  Moscow 
to  meet  with  you.  They  are  bringing  their  maps, 
charts,  and  reports.  They  even  have  a videotape  of 
their  interviews  with  the  witnesses.” 


17 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


The  car  had  traveled  through  a depressing  subur- 
ban landscape,  and  we  were  now  entering  the  broad 
network  of  boulevards  in  the  city  itself. 

The  drive  from  any  airport  to  city  center  is  often 
dreary  and  depressing.  I know  few  uglier  sights  in  all 
of  France  than  the  sewerlike  expressway  that  takes 
visitors  from  Charles  de  Gaulle  Airport  in  Roissy  to 
the  northern  suburbs  of  Paris;  the  landscape  one  en- 
counters from  the  JFK  facilities  to  Manhattan  always 
makes  me  want  to  turn  around  and  flee,  except  that 
there  is  no  place  to  escape  between  the  various  cem- 
eteries and  slums  one  has  the  privilege  of  crossing  on 
the  way  into  New  York. 

The  depression  that  seizes  you  as  you  drive  to  Mos- 
cow is  of  a different  sort,  however.  There  are  the  un- 
avoidable suburbs  with  all  the  grayness  of  their 
buildings;  there  are  the  barracklike  housing  units 
lined  up  like  penitentiaries.  But  I could  show  you 
identical  gray  structures  in  Saint-Denis  and  on  Long 
Island,  as  if  city  planners  the  world  over,  communists 
and  capitalists  alike,  had  hired  the  same  moronic 
dropouts  from  the  same  architectural  schools.  Yet 
there  is  something  especially  dreary  about  the  drive 
into  Moscow. 

The  poverty  in  evidence  along  the  way  is  not  worse 
than  the  poverty  anyone  sees  in  Paris  or  New  York. 
What  is  so  oppressive  about  driving  into  the  heart  of 
Moscow  is  the  absurd  evidence  of  overwhelming  bu- 
reaucracy, of  ever-present  red  tape.  You  can  see  it  in 
the  crowds  standing  in  front  of  the  few,  poorly  lit 
food  stores.  You  can  see  it  in  the  eyes  of  the  old  women 
crossing  the  street  in  front  of  the  car  at  a red  light. 
You  can  see  it  in  the  long  lines  of  people  shuffling 
home  after  work,  staring  at  their  feet. 


18 


CULTURE  SHOCK 


Soon  the  feeling  of  gloom  was  more  than  we  could 
bear. 

“What  is  happening  now  in  Voronezh?”  asked  Mar- 
tine  to  break  the  heavy  silence  hanging  over  us.  “Have 
more  sightings  been  reported?” 

“Oh,  yes,”  Genya  answered.  “We  continue  to  hear 
about  new  cases.  But  you  would  make  a mistake,  if 
you  permit  my  saying  so,  by  concentrating  exclusively 
on  those.” 

“What  interests  me  about  Voronezh  is  that  you  seem 
to  have  a cluster  of  many  different  events  in  a small 
area,”  I pointed  out  to  him. 

“But  precisely  the  same  thing  has  happened  in  many 
other  places.  For  instance,  in  the  region  of  Perm  in 
the  Ural  Mountains,  some  of  my  friends  have  inves- 
tigated numerous  incidents.  We  even  have  some  re- 
markable photographs.  We’ve  asked  one  of  the  local 
experts  to  come  and  meet  with  you.” 

“What  about  Kazantsev?” 

“You  will  meet  with  him,  too.  He  is  inviting  you  to 
his  home.” 

“What  about  Professor  Zolotov?”  I asked.  Alexis 
Zolotov  is  legendary  for  his  patient  research  into  the 
Tunguska  catastrophe  of  1908. 

“He  will  be  here  on  Tuesday.” 

“It’s  going  to  be  a busy  week,”  I told  Martine. 

The  conversation  halted.  We  were  approaching  the 
center  of  the  city.  Between  the  big  square  blocks  of 
the  apartment  buildings  and  the  centers  of  adminis- 
tration we  could  see  the  lighted  towers  of  old  churches 
and  the  walls  of  the  Kremlin.  The  car  stopped  along- 
side numerous  buses  in  front  of  an  enormous  struc- 
ture: the  Hotel  Rossiya  (Russia),  which  would  be  our 
home  for  the  duration  of  our  stay. 


19 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“Give  me  your  passports  and  wait  here,”  said  our 
guide. 

“I  beg  your  pardon?” 

“I  must  register  you  with  the  security  office  of  the 
hotel.  They  will  return  your  passports  when  you 
leave.” 

Suddenly  we  felt  trapped  again.  A man  we  had 
barely  met  an  hour  before  was  walking  away  through 
the  snowy  drabness  of  a Moscow  square,  taking  with 
him  the  documents  we  would  need  to  leave  the  coun- 
try, or  even  to  travel  beyond  city  limits.  This  might 
be  the  era  of  glasnost,  noted  Martine,  but  from  now 
on,  with  our  passports  safely  stored  away  in  the  cof- 
fers of  the  police,  we  would  not  be  able  to  take  a step 
or  talk  with  anyone  without  our  Russian  guides. 

Fortunately,  the  journalists  who  were  assigned  to 
accompany  us  were  far  from  the  stereotype  of  the 
burly,  surly  Russian  bureaucrat.  They  were  bright 
young  men  with  an  intense  curiosity  and  a solid  sense 
of  humor. 

After  an  agonizingly  long  delay,  Genya  came  slush- 
ing back  to  the  car.  We  cut  through  the  mixed  crowd 
that  clustered  around  the  heavy  double  glass  doors. 
Genya  flashed  his  identification  and  we  entered  the 
huge  lobby  of  the  Russia  Hotel. 

Like  all  the  hotels  reserved  for  foreigners,  the  Rus- 
sia was  a huge  Stalinesque  mass.  A thousand  rooms 
were  arranged  around  a central  courtyard.  The  cor- 
ridors appeared  to  extend  to  the  left  and  to  the  right 
all  the  way  to  the  horizon,  where  you  found  another 
set  of  double  doors  and  another  seemingly  infinite  cor- 
ridor. At  the  midpoint  of  every  side  of  the  square,  on 
every  level,  was  a little  lobby  where  a young  woman 
served  as  watchdog,  service  supervisor,  telephone  op- 


20 


CULTURE  SHOCK 


erator,  and  concierge.  These  duties  were  not  as  over- 
whelming as  one  might  suppose,  however,  because 
most  of  the  equipment  was  in  such  a state  of  disrepair 
or  antiquity  that  everyone  seemed  to  have  given  up 
on  fixing  it.  I requested  a phone  communication  that 
first  evening,  to  call  my  wife  in  California,  but  some- 
how no  line  to  the  outside  world  could  be  made  avail- 
able until  late  evening  of  the  following  day.  An 
operator  eventually  came  through  the  next  night  at 
11:00.  The  old  Hollywood  expression  “Don’t  call  us, 
we’ll  call  you”  must  have  been  invented  by  a Soviet 
communications  expert.  We  soon  adapted  to  this  sense 
of  cheerful  incompetence.  After  all,  our  rooms  were 
warm  and  featured  black-and-white  television  sets 
with  three  channels;  only  one  of  which,  though,  had 
an  actual  picture  accompanied  by  audible  sound.  In- 
credibly, we  were  being  charged  a hundred  dollars  a 
day  for  each  room. 

If  it  had  not  been  for  Genya,  we  would  have  starved 
that  night.  We  went  up  to  one  of  the  large  restaurants 
in  the  hotel,  where  another  surprise  awaited  us. 
Through  a mere  crack  in  the  massive  door  a maitre  d’ 
in  impeccable  black  suit  and  tie  arrogantly  asserted 
that  it  was  utterly  impossible  to  accommodate  any 
more  guests.  Genya  stepped  forward  and  argued  forc- 
ibly. The  man  was  urged  to  open  the  door  a little 
more,  and  we  were  able  to  see  that  barely  half  of  the 
room  was  occupied.  Arrangements  were  quickly  made 
and  a waiter  preceded  us  to  a table  near  the  window. 
Once  again  we  experienced  the  abrupt  transition  from 
misery  to  affluence,  from  ice  to  warmth,  from  hunger 
to  luxury  that  seemed  to  characterize  life  in  Russia. 
Our  troubles  were  forgotten  as  soon  as  we  sat  down. 
The  restaurant  overlooked  the  Church  of  the  Blessed 


21 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Basil,  resplendent  in  the  glare  of  a hundred  projec- 
tors. Our  table  seemed  to  be  nestled  in  the  sky,  with 
a plunging  view  of  the  painted  spires  and  gilded  bulbs, 
and  the  snow  of  the  square  as  a backdrop. 

It  would  take  us  a while  to  understand  why  it  was 
almost  impossible  to  be  served  dinner  unless  one  could 
pull  the  appropriate  strings,  even  in  such  a restaurant 
where  people  paid  in  hard  currency. 

“In  this  system,  the  waiters  make  as  much  money 
if  they  serve  ten  guests  or  if  they  serve  a hundred,” 
someone  finally  explained  to  us  in  a whisper.  “And 
they  get  to  take  some  of  the  leftover  food  at  night— 
to  feed  their  family  and  friends.” 

At  the  next  table  were  eight  Russians  from  the  priv- 
ileged class.  They  were  impeccably  dressed,  and 
champagne  flowed  freely.  Did  they  know  that  the 
shops  of  Moscow  were  empty,  and  that  scientists  and 
other  professionals  were  spending  long  hours  every  day 
standing  in  line  for  a few  pounds  of  potatoes,  a fish, 
or  a piece  of  meat? 

The  waiter  brought  us  caviar,  exquisite  salmon,  and 
various  specialties.  We  lifted  small  glasses  of  vodka  in 
a toast.  There  would  be  many  more  over  the  next  few 
days. 

“What  is  so  interesting  about  the  sightings  around 
Perm?”  we  asked  Genya. 

He  described  the  scene  enthusiastically.  “The  wit- 
nesses report  some  incredible  things.  Some  of  our  own 
journalists  have  seen  glowing  balls  of  light  drifting 
eerily  through  the  forest  ...” 

“Are  there  any  photographs?” 

“Yes,  of  course.  Although  the  objects  are  very  elu- 
sive. But  that’s  not  all.  They’ve  seen  sheets  of  energy 


22 


CULTURE  SHOCK 


over  the  fields.  And  some  of  the  people  who  did  the 
research  have  come  down  with  unexplained  illnesses.” 

“With  whom  is  our  first  appointment  tomorrow 
morning?”  I asked  Genya. 

“You  will  be  meeting  Professor  Vladimir  Azhazha, 
who  heads  up  the  Committee  for  the  Study  of  Anom- 
alous Phenomena,  here  in  Moscow.  He  has  many 
things  to  tell  you.  And  many  questions  to  ask.” 

Our  guide  left  us  after  dinner,  but  we  did  not  feel 
like  sleeping.  The  urge  was  too  strong  to  get  close  to 
the  wonderful  structures  we  had  barely  glimpsed  from 
the  restaurant  window,  so  we  sneaked  past  the  guards 
in  the  lobby  and  took  our  first  stroll  on  Red  Square. 

LENIN  AND  THE  GIRLS  OF  GLASNOST 

At  a time  when  regimes  collapsed,  when  the  Berlin 
Wall  was  being  chiseled  into  thousands  of  chips  that 
were  sold  off  as  souvenirs  and  Christmas  gifts,  when 
dictators  tumbled,  and  when  the  socialist  satellites  fell 
from  the  rigid  orbits  they  had  maintained  for  forty 
years,  it  was  a thrill  to  begin  the  new  decade  with  a 
walk  on  the  ice  that  covered  the  wide  square  in  front 
of  the  Kremlin.  Over  the  next  five  days  we  would  meet 
the  people  who  had  been  doing  research  on  paranor- 
mal phenomena  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Some  of  them 
would  be  speaking  to  a Westerner  for  the  first  time, 
we  thought,  as  we  watched  the  crude  white  lights  on 
the  facade  of  the  GUM  department  store  and  the  pro- 
jectors illuminating  the  crenelated  walls  of  the  Krem- 
lin and  the  Lenin  mausoleum.  Every  minute  would 
be  important.  We  had  little  time  to  observe,  to  un- 
derstand, to  absorb  the  meaning,  the  background. 


23 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


This  was  a unique  period  in  history.  Even  the  experts 
were  confused. 

Hundreds  of  people  were  massing  around  us  in  the 
square,  waiting  for  the  changing  of  the  guard,  always 
executed  with  that  beautiful  mechanical  precision  that 
characterizes  military  operations.  But  another  feeling 
was  clearly  detectable,  and  it  was  a spiritual  current 
so  strong  that  it  rose  from  the  crowd  like  a song.  It 
had  nothing  to  do  with  politics,  although  the  sense  of 
a gathering  storm  must  have  been  in  every  mind,  with 
the  anticipation  of  a change  in  the  weather  of  history 
itself.  Among  this  group  assembled  from  the  four  cor- 
ners of  the  Soviet  world  arose  a fervor  that  caught  us 
completely  by  surprise.  It  was  a fervor  that  bordered 
on  the  mystical. 

It  was  a delight  to  watch  the  people  in  the  glare  of 
the  floodlights.  Here  again,  paradox  was  the  rule.  In 
the  West,  everyone  was  well  fed,  the  stores  were  filled 
to  capacity  with  meats  and  delicacies,  and  the  wear- 
ing of  fur  was  frowned  upon.  Here  the  shops  were 
empty,  people  were  hungry,  and  the  economy  was  in 
shambles,  but  the  women  strolled  across  Red  Square 
in  full-length  mink  coats  with  tall  shapkas  on  their 
proud  heads.  I briefly  caught  the  eye  of  one  of  them: 
she  was  a beautiful  blonde  of  thirty  or  thirty-five.  She 
came  toward  us  like  a ship  sailing  majestically  through 
the  frozen  Arctic. 

“Anna  Karenina,”  whispered  Martine. 

This  was  going  to  be  a journey  of  many  contrasts 
for  which  we  realized  we  were  not  adequately  pre- 
pared. The  temperature  was  three  degrees  below 
freezing  and  falling. 

I went  up  to  my  room  and  turned  on  the  television 
set.  The  erratic,  wavy  picture  stabilized  to  reveal  a 


24 


CULTURE  SHOCK 


late-evening  program  of  boring  art  discussion  in 
French  about  Pope  Urban  VIII!  I could  only  laugh  as 
I imagined  two  hundred  million  Soviet  citizens  trying 
to  make  sense  of  this  absurdity. 

The  briefing  I had  received  in  the  United  States  in- 
cluded some  stern  recommendations  about  what  not 
to  do  in  the  Soviet  Union.  “Don’t  change  dollars  on 
the  black  market.  And  don’t  take  any  men’s  maga- 
zines with  you.  Pornography  is  a crime  over  there.  If 
they  find  Playboy  in  your  suitcase,  you’ll  be  in  deep 
trouble.” 

Thankfully,  the  program  about  Urban  VIII  came 
to  an  end.  It  was  followed  by  an  astonishing  public 
announcement  by  a representative  of  Playboy,  who 
was  in  Russia  to  recruit  pretty  Moscovites  who  would 
pose  naked  for  a special  issue  on  “The  Girls  of  Glas- 
nost.”  Once  again,  history  had  overtaken  ideology.  An 
enormously  vital  change  was  sweeping  half  the  planet, 
catching  all  the  bureaucracies  by  surprise:  they  could 
take  their  briefing  and  shove  it!  Was  the  UFO  wave 
of  1989  in  the  Soviet  Union  only  a symptom,  or  was 
it  a deep  factor  in  the  change?  In  either  case,  I now 
realized,  it  could  not  be  separated  from  the  historical 
events  that  carried  it. 


25 


CHAPTER  3 


RULES  OF 
ENGAGEMENT 


During  night  flights  . . . the  radar  operator  discovered 
clearly  defined  blips  in  the  240°  to  270°  radar  sector. 

They  moved  on  a course  of  90°  at  a speed  of  720  kilo- 
meters per  hour  . . . the  upper  edge  of  the  blips  began 
to  come  down  . . . the  lower  edge  of  the  blips  dropped 
to  the  ground.  This  was  reported  at  another  radar  sta- 
tion [in  the  city  of  Tiraspol]  and  a request  was  made 
that  it  be  checked.  The  data  was  confirmed. 

Witness  N.  A.  Baydukov,  Odeskaya  Oblast 
April  4,  1966 

UFO  abductions  have  become  especially  common  dur- 
ing 1989;  so  common  that  we  believe  we  have  now 
identified  the  mechanism  of  these  events. 

Professor  Vladimir  Azhazha 
Moscow,  January  1990 

Our  work  started  early,  with  friendly  but  formal 
opening  remarks  by  Vladimir  Milyutenko,  vice- 
chairman  of  the  Soviet  press  agency  Novosti,  who 
generously  placed  his  office  at  our  disposal  for  the  du- 
ration of  our  stay.  We  were  introduced  to  his  staff  and 


26 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


to  one  of  the  country’s  leading  UFO  experts,  Professor 
Vladimir  Azhazha. 

“My  interest  in  the  problem  didn’t  really  start  until 
1976,”  said  Professor  Azhazha,  while  the  pleasant  sec- 
retaries of  Vice-Chairman  Milyutenko  brought  hot  tea 
and  sugar  on  a beautiful  tray.  “Prior  to  that  I had 
laughed  like  everyone  else  whenever  the  subject  was 
mentioned.  We  thought  only  you,  the  crazy  people  in 
the  West,  were  foolish  enough  to  believe  in  flying  sau- 
cers!” 

We  noted  that  good-natured,  general  laughter  from 
all  those  around  the  table  greeted  this  statement. 
That,  too,  was  a new  factor. 

“What  made  you  change  your  mind?”  asked  Mar- 
tine,  who  had  pulled  a pen  and  notebook  from  her 
purse. 

All  our  hosts,  including  Milyutenko,  our  interpre- 
ters, and  various  lower  officials  who  seemed  to  con- 
sider it  an  unusual  privilege  to  witness  such  an 
exchange,  turned  to  hear  Professor  Azhazha’s  answer. 
It  took  all  of  us  by  surprise.  And  it  set  the  stage  for 
the  frankness  and  the  extraordinary  scope  of  the  rev- 
elations that  would  come  in  the  following  days. 

ENCOUNTERS  AT  SEA 

“I  had  to  change  my  mind  when  I was  asked  to  per- 
form certain  hydrospheric  studies  as  a submarine  of- 
ficer in  the  Soviet  navy,”  Azhazha  answered.  “After 
publishing  the  results  of  some  of  our  experiments  done 
aboard  submarines,  I was  asked  to  serve  as  the  scien- 
tific director  of  a group  studying  underwater  UFOs.”11 

Over  the  years  there  have  been  many  rumors  about 
similar  studies  conducted  in  the  United  States  by  the 


27 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


military — studies  for  which  the  Air  Force’s  Project 
Blue  Book  was  only  a public  relations  cover.  But  re- 
sults have  never  been  revealed  by  the  Pentagon.  The 
Soviets  were  obviously  taking  a very  bold  step  in  talk- 
ing to  us  so  openly. 

“What  was  the  year  of  the  study?”  I inquired. 

“It  lasted  ten  years,  from  1976  to  1987,”  answered 
Azhazha  in  a matter-of-fact  way  that  only  added  to 
our  interest. 

I looked  around  me.  The  representatives  from  No- 
vosti  were  listening  to  Azhazha’s  report  with  a fasci- 
nation equal  to  mine. 

“Obviously,  the  Soviet  navy  has  taken  the  problem 
very  seriously,  for  many  years,”  remarked  Martine. 

“We  had  to.  There  were  too  many  incidents  that 
could  not  be  denied.  It  all  began  when  we  tried  to 
understand  the  nature  of  certain  underwater  ob- 
jects that  followed  our  submarines.  At  times  they 
even  anticipated  our  maneuvers!  Initially,  we  thought 
they  were  American  devices,”  added  Azhazha,  rais- 
ing a hand  to  his  forehead  as  he  recalled  what  must 
have  been  a difficult  research  project.  “One  day 
such  an  object  came  to  the  surface  in  a rather  spec- 
tacular fashion.  One  of  our  icebreakers  was  working 
its  way  in  the  Arctic  Ocean  when  a brilliant  spher- 
ical craft  suddenly  broke  through  the  ice  and  flew 
up  vertically,  showering  the  vessel  with  fragments 
of  ice.  All  the  sailors  on  deck  and  the  officers  on  the 
bridge  saw  it.  And  it  was  hard  to  deny  the  hole  in  the 
ice!” 

“Could  it  have  been  a missile  test?” 

Our  interpreter  quickly  translated  the  question  and 
obtained  the  following  answer:  “You  don’t  shoot  a 
missile  that  way.  You  have  to  break  the  ice  first.  Fur- 


28 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


thermore,  the  object  was  a bright  sphere.  We  knew 
what  nuclear  missiles  looked  like!” 

A jovial  man  with  a friendly,  round  face  and  a quiet 
but  intensely  focused  approach  to  his  subject,  Azha- 
zha  went  on  with  his  enumeration  of  some  of  the  most 
remarkable  UFO  cases  in  the  archives  of  the  Soviet 
navy.  “These  phenomena  were  not  limited  to  the  Arc- 
tic. Our  ships  in  the  Pacific  also  reported  flying  ob- 
jects, vertical  cylinders.  So  we  ended  up  drafting 
actual  rules  of  engagement:  what  to  do  when  a vessel 
was  confronted  with  a UFO,  how  it  should  be  ob- 
served ...” 

“How  did  these  objects  behave  vis-a-vis  your  ships?” 
I asked  Azhazha,  fascinated  by  his  description  of  these 
encounters. 

“As  a superior  technology  would  behave  before  an 
inferior  one,”  was  the  answer.  “They  treated  us  the 
way  we  would  treat  a fish,  or  a rabbit.  It  is  naive  to 
assume  they  have  any  goodwill  toward  us,  or  any  need 
to  interact.  They  simply  seem  to  go  about  their  busi- 
ness. They  coexist  with  us.” 

“What  was  the  attitude  of  the  navy  hierarchy?” 

“Many  officers  were  skeptical,  but  the  reports  were 
hard  to  deny.  They  were  carefully  recorded.  On  Oc- 
tober 7,  1977,  a submarine  repair  ship  called  the 
Volga  was  at  sea  when  nine  disk-shaped  objects  cir- 
cled it.  This  lasted  eighteen  minutes.  And  all  the  time 
the  radio,  the  on-board  communications  systems,  all 
the  electronic  equipment  went  berserk.  The  com- 
mander, Captain  Tarantin,  ordered  his  men:  T want 
you  to  observe  this  carefully  and  to  remember  it!  I 
want  you  to  take  pictures  and  to  draw  it,  so  that  when 
we  return  to  the  Soviet  Union  no  one  will  be  able  to 
say  that  your  captain  was  drunk  or  crazy!’  ” 


29 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“Were  such  reports  made  public?” 

Azhazha  shook  his  head  no.  “At  the  time,  natu- 
rally, they  were  classified  top  secret.  Now  we  have  a 
more  open  attitude  in  this  country.  We  are  able  to 
talk  about  such  things.  On  a few  rare  occasions  I did 
publish  some  UFO  information,  but  I paid  for  it  un- 
der Leonid  Brezhnev.  The  official  reaction  was  very 
harsh,  very  negative.  My  career  suffered  as  a result, 
and  the  directorship  of  a scientific  group  was  taken 
away  from  me.” 

“What  is  the  situation  now?”  I asked.  “You  seem  to 
enjoy  much  greater  freedom.” 

“We  have  made  a lot  of  progress.  We  were  allowed 
to  form  the  Moscow  UFO  committee.  I served  as  di- 
rector for  the  first  twelve  months,  and  on  July  15, 
1988,  we  organized  a countrywide  commission,  pre- 
sided by  Cosmonaut  Pavel  Popovich.  He  is  away  from 
Moscow  this  week.  Otherwise  he  would  have  been  at 
this  table  today.  Popovich  has  flown  in  space  twice. 
Although  he  never  saw  any  UFOs  from  orbit,  he  has 
observed  some  unidentified  objects  as  an  aircraft  pi- 
lot.” 

As  Professor  Azhazha  explained  his  work,  the  words 
of  an  American  skeptic  came  to  my  mind.  James 
Oberg,  who  is  frequently  featured  in  Omni  magazine, 
had  made  fun  of  the  Soviet  research  on  UFOs,  argu- 
ing that  it  was  conducted  by  “a  small  coterie  of  ob- 
scure enthusiasts.”12  Shooting  from  the  hip,  he  had 
even  said  of  Azhazha  that  his  specialty  seemed  to  be 
“embellishing  foreign  UFO  reports  and  fobbing  them 
off  as  Russian  originals.”  There  was  only  one  thing 
wrong  with  Omni’ s sarcasm:  none  of  their  writers, 
least  of  them  Oberg,  had  ever  taken  the  trouble  to 
meet  Azhazha. 


30 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


This  wasn’t  an  informal  conversation  with  some 
drunken  journalist  in  a Berlin  coffee  shop  or  with  a 
marginal  visionary  at  an  international  New  Age  con- 
gregation; this  was  Moscow.  The  paneled  walls  of  the 
Novosti  executive  offices  were  gleaming  with  a well- 
polished  look.  On  the  desk  were  books,  flies,  and  a 
calendar  from  Aeroflot.  Staff  people  took  notes,  drank 
tea,  and  periodically  put  out  their  cigarettes  in  glass 
ashtrays.  Sometimes  our  exchanges  were  halted  by  an- 
imated arguments  in  Russian  that  our  interpreters 
were  hard-pressed  to  follow.  What  we  were  hearing 
had  never  been  said  in  the  West.  Some  of  it  had  never 
been  said  publicly  in  the  Soviet  Union.  But  one  thing 
was  already  clear:  the  Russian  researchers  of  the  UFO 
phenomenon  had  enough  real  data  of  their  own  not 
to  waste  their  time  fobbing  off  Western  sightings,  as 
the  flippant  remark  by  James  Oberg  suggested. 

RUSSIAN  ORIGINALS 

Over  the  next  two  hours  the  former  submarine  officer 
described  for  us  the  wide  panorama  of  the  Soviet  UFO 
archives,  including  many  cases  he  had  personally 
studied. 

“I  know  you  have  argued  that  UFO  phenomena  are 
as  old  as  mankind  itself,”  Azhazha  said  to  me.  “Well, 
we  have  documents  from  the  Middle  Ages  that  men-*' 
tion  similar  unidentified  objects.  You  would  also  be 
amused  to  read  such  reports  in  Russian  newspapers 
from  the  period  1910  to  1912.” 

“Have  you  found  a random  time  distribution  among 
Soviet  cases,  or  do  they  occur  in  waves,  as  they  do  in 
the  West?”  I asked. 

“They  definitely  occur  in  waves.  We  have  recorded 


31 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


three  major  ones.  The  first  one  occurred  in  1966-67, 
the  second  one  between  1977  and  1979.  But  it  was 
poorly  documented  because  no  specialized  service  was 
in  existence  at  the  time.  On  the  contrary,  the  latest 
wave  of  1989,  which  seems  to  continue  as  we  speak, 
has  given  us  a wealth  of  data — up  to  fifteen  cases  per 
day.  In  a single  incident,  which  took  place  on  October 
5,  1989,  in  Kirov,  there  were  between  100  and  120 
objects.” 

“Can  you  describe  some  of  the  specific  features  of 
last  year’s  wave?” 

“There  were  many  large  cylinders,  horizontal  cyl- 
inders,” answered  Azhazha  as  he  consulted  his  notes. 
“For  instance,  less  than  a year  ago,  on  February  13, 
1989,  between  9:00  and  10:00  p.m.,  such  a cylinder 
flew  over  a road  at  an  altitude  of  less  than  one  mile. 
This  happened  in  the  Transcaucasus,  in  Cabardino- 
Balcari.  It  seemed  to  be  metallic,  and  its  length  was 
estimated  at  about  1,500  feet.  Its  nose  was  lower  than 
its  tail,  and  it  flew  at  65  mph.” 

I prompted  him  to  continue.  “Were  there  several 
witnesses?” 

“Actually,  it  was  seen  by  thousands  of  people — 
truck  drivers,  people  in  cars.  It  seemed  to  have  spot- 
lights in  front  and  in  back.  And  some  porthole-like 
openings  were  visible  along  its  sides.  It  flew  over  the 
city  of  Nalchik,  then  drifted  down  to  an  altitude  of 
150  feet,  made  a turn,  and  flew  off. 

I “The  most  interesting  fact  about  this  case  is  that, 
as  the  object  turned,  people  saw  some  fins  on  its  tail. 
But  when  the  turn  was  completed,  the  fins  had  van- 
ished. We  have  other  cases  where  parts  of  the  objects 
seem  to  materialize  on  the  spot.” 

Azhazha  bent  toward  us  across  the  table  for  em- 


32 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


phasis.  “This  is  a key  characteristic  of  the  phenome- 
non:  it  is  polymorphous.” 

Unsure  that  I was  getting  an  accurate  French  trans- 
lation of  that  last  sentence,  I asked  Azhazha  to  repeat 
what  he  had  just  said. 

“These  objects  are  polymorphous.  They  can  change 
shapes  dynamically  in  flight.” 

I took  a document  from  my  briefcase.  It  was  a re- 
print of  an  article  I had  written:  “Five  Arguments 
Against  the  Extraterrestrial  Origin  of  UFOs.”  In  that 
article  I had  mentioned  the  ability  of  the  objects  to 
materialize  on  the  spot  and  to  change  shapes  as  a fact 
pointing  toward  a multidimensional  origin  rather  than 
a simple  spatial  or  interplanetary  origin  for  the  phe- 
nomenon.13 

Azhazha  read  the  section  of  the  article  I was  pre- 
senting to  him.  Then  he  looked  at  me  in  surprise,  put 
down  the  papers,  and  said:  “We  have  reached  very  ^ 
similar  conclusions.  It  is  as  if  you  and  I had  been 
working  together  for  the  last  ten  years.” 

HUMANOIDS 

AND  PSYCHIC  PHENOMENA 

“As  investigators,  we  are  only  one  element  of  a system 
that  links  together  the  object,  the  percipient,  and  the 
space  around  them,”  continued  Azhazha.  “Therefore 
we  must  consider  the  psychophysical  interaction  that 
may  take  place  between  the  object,  the  witness,  and 
the  noosphere — the  plane  of  human  consciousness.  If 
we  don’t  consider  such  interaction,  the  sightings  make 
no  sense  at  all.” 

“Can  you  give  us  an  example?” 

He  thought  about  my  question  for  a moment,  then 


33 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


went  on:  “Last  year  in  Vologda  some  spheres  were 
seen  in  the  sky.  They  were  about  sixteen  feet  in  di- 
ameter. What  was  unusual  was  that  these  spheres  did 
i not  look  like  a craft  at  all.  Instead  they  resembled  a 
* woman’s  face.  This  seems  absurd.  What  can  we  do 
about  such  a report?  We  do  not  even  have  a good 
working  hypothesis.  Yet  the  logic  of  the  events  shows 
that  the  phenomenon  has  existed  as  long  as  human 
civilization  itself,  as  we  said  a moment  ago.” 

“How  do  you  deal  with  humanoid  reports?” 

Azhazha  had  obviously  expected  that  I would  ask 
him  this  question.  He  sipped  some  tea,  sat  back  in  his 
chair,  and  said  calmly:  “We  have  many  reports  of 
v such  beings.  They  vary  widely  in  their  appearance  and 
size,  from  some  nine  inches  to  forty-five  feet  in  a re- 
port from  the  Volga  region  in  1989.  I hasten  to  say 
that  we  have  not  yet  analyzed  this  case,  so  I will  not 
vouch  for  its  reliability;  it  is  simply  too  recent.” 

“How  do  you  approach  this  problem?” 

“The  first  challenge  we  face  is  to  try  and  detect  the 
real  signal  in  the  midst  of  a great  deal  of  noise.  We 
find  that  the  witnesses  are  generally  sane.  What  is  ob- 
vious is  they  have  healthy  minds,  contrary  to  what 
^ many  academic  scientists  think.  But  the  observations 
are  truly  bewildering.  When  a UFO  being  appeared 
in  Vologda  it  seemed  to  be  flat,  and  its  head  was  lower 
than  its  shoulders!  People  who  saw  it  from  the  side 
reported  it  seemed  to  be  only  about  three  inches  thick. 
Such  reports  obviously  challenge  everything  we  know, 
unless  you  are  right  with  your  theory  about  other  di- 
mensions being  involved,  beyond  ordinary  space- 
time.” 

I consulted  my  notes  before  addressing  him  again. 
“I  have  read  reports  about  some  of  the  witnesses 


34 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


themselves  actually  disappearing  during  the  sightings  i' 
in  Voronezh.  Can  you  confirm  this?” 

“Yes.  This  took  place  on  September  27.  Some  of  the 
observers  vanished  and  later  reappeared.  The  same 
phenomenon  was  reported  in  Vologda.  A woman  from 
the  village  was  walking  along  in  her  bathrobe  without 
realizing  that  a UFO  entity  was  nearby.  She  just 
seemed  to  be  attracted  outside  by  something.  The  wit- 
nesses screamed  to  catch  her  attention,  but  she  didn’t 
hear  them  and  she  just  kept  walking.  When  she  came 
close  to  where  the  being  was,  they  both  vanished  on 
the  spot.  About  half  an  hour  later  she  reappeared, 
yelling  in  fear.  Our  colleagues  in  Leningrad  are  trying 
to  locate  her  again.  In  such  cases  we  always  work 
through  local  teams.” 

“It  would  seem  that  it  would  be  simple  to  find  her, 
in  a small  village  ...” 

“It’s  harder  than  you  think.  This  was  a simple 
woman  who  is  very  much  afraid  now.  She  has  gone 
into  hiding.  The  other  witnesses  are  scared.  People 
are  traumatized.  All  we  know  is  that  she  could  not 
remember  anything  when  she  reappeared.” 

ABDUCTION  PHENOMENA 
IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

I pressed  on,  my  curiosity  in  a feeding  frenzy.  “This 
last  case  you  mentioned,  the  woman  from  the  village, 
is  what  we  refer  to  in  the  West  as  an  abduction.  Are 
such  cases  frequently  observed  in  your  country,  and 
have  you  been  able  to  find  any  particular  pattern?” 

This  was  the  question  I had  been  itching  to  ask  all 
morning,  of  course.  Almost  nothing  was  known  about 
abduction  cases  outside  the  Anglo-Saxon  literature. 


35 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“Abductions  have  become  especially  common  dur- 
ing 1989,”  Azhazha  said,  “so  common  that  we  believe 
we  have  now  identified  the  mechanism  of  these  events. 
I will  give  you  three  examples.” 

Our  pens  were  flying  as  we  took  notes  over  the  next 
hour. 

The  first  case  mentioned  by  Azhazha  took  place  in 
a suburb  of  Nicolayev  at  midnight  on  September  16, 
1989.  Nicolayev  is  a city  of  a half  million  people,  a 
Black  Sea  port  about  seventy  miles  northeast  of 
Odessa.  A young  woman  who  worked  at  the  meat- 
packing plant  there  had  left  her  job  early  to  catch  the 
tramway  home.  She  was  alone.  The  tramway  lights 
came  into  view.  Suddenly  she  realized  she  was  being 
levitated  to  a height  of  160  feet.  In  the  meantime  the 
whole  crew  had  left  the  plant  and  saw  their  coworker 
floating  in  the  air,  alongside  an  unidentified  object. 

“Naturally,  everyone  started  yelling  and  scream- 
ing/’ Azhazha  told  us,  “and  eventually  she  was  re- 
turned to  the  ground.  But  we  wonder  if  many  isolated 
people  are  not  abducted  this  way.” 

The  second  incident  occurred  near  Nalchik,  in  the 
Caucasus,  on  October  11,  1989.  A sixteen-year-old  girl 
who  was  in  a courtyard  was  approached  by  an  object. 
She  was  not  abducted,  but  she  suffered  severe  burns 
on  her  hands  and  had  to  be  hospitalized  for  stress.  The 
actual  location  was  the  village  of  Maelski,  and  the 
time  was  between  6:00  and  6:15  p.m.  The  girl,  Na- 
tasha Barinova,  was  a student  at  a technical  college 
and  was  well  regarded  by  her  teachers.  She  had 
I walked  home  and  had  reached  the  yard  in  front  of 
J her  house  when  she  felt  that  she  was  being  lifted  up, 
as  in  the  case  in  Nicolayev  three  weeks  earlier.  But 
the  unusual  aspect  in  this  particular  event  is  that  she 


36 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


saw  a net  falling  toward  her  from  the  sky.  In  the  cen- 
ter of  the  net  was  a bright  white  point.  She  tried  to 
push  it  back  and  received  an  electric  shock.  When  she 
screamed  her  voice  came  out  sharp  and  shrill,  as  if 
acoustic  waves  had  been  distorted  by  the  atmosphere 
around  her.  Her  family  rushed  out  of  the  house  and 
saw  her  in  the  air,  with  a flying  disk  hovering  less 
than  fifty  feet  away. 

“What  was  the  nature  of  her  injuries?”  I asked 
Azhazha. 

“It  was  as  if  something  had  tried  to  pull  the  skin 
from  her  fingers.  The  tips  of  her  fingers  were  en- 
larged.” 

“How  did  the  event  end?” 

“The  disk  vanished  and  she  found  herself  back  on 
the  ground.  She  was  paralyzed  for  a while.” 

The  most  remarkable  case,  an  abduction  attempt, 
took  place  on  July  4,  1989,  in  a park  near  Kiev,  on 
the  shores  of  the  Dnieper  River. 

It  was  twilight,  but  there  was  enough  light  to  see 
clearly.  Two  women,  Vera  Prokoflyevna,  a retired 
employee  of  a factory  in  Darnitsa,  and  her  friend  Al- 
exandra Stepanovna,  an  engineer,  together  with  Al- 
exandra’s six-year-old  daughter,  were  strolling  in  the 
park.  The  following  is  the  story  told  by  Prokoflyevna. 

The  party  came  closer  to  the  river  and  suddenly 
saw  a “boat”  and  three  beings  on  board.  The  beings 
looked  very  pale  and  had  absolutely  identical  faces, 
like  identical  twins.  They  had  long  blond  hair,  big 
eyes,  and  were  wearing  collarless  silver  shirts  that 
looked  like  nightgowns.  The  beings  bluntly  told  the 
women  that  they  came  from  another  planet:  “Our 
planet  is  so  far  that  your  mind  cannot  fathom  that. 
When  you  become  like  us,  you  will  know.  Every  day 


37 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


we  take  one  person  from  Earth  to  our  world.  We  will 
take  you.  Our  ship  is  nearby;  we  will  show  it  to  you.” 
They  spoke  Russian  with  a strange  accent  that  Pro- 
kofiyevna  called  “ancient,”  rather  than  foreign. 

The  transcript  does  not  say  how  the  beings  left  the 
boat  and  started  walking  along  with  the  women.  “One 
walked  in  front  of  us,  and  two  with  us,”  Prokofiyevna 
reported,  “one  on  each  side,  as  if  they  were  guarding 
us.  I wanted  to  shout  and  run,  but  I was  drawn  to 
them  as  if  by  a magnet  and  I had  no  strength.  When 
they  looked  at  me,  I felt  like  needles  were  all  over  my 
body.  Alexandra  Stepanovna  became  very  pale;  I be- 
lieve I looked  no  better.  We  started  begging  them  not 
to  take  us,  because  we  had  families  and  children. 

“Behind  some  trees,  we  saw  a craft.  It  was  silvery, 
like  their  clothing,  and  looked  like  a huge  barrel  with 
a circular  antenna  on  the  top  of  it.” 

The  little  girl  became  very  scared  and  started  cry- 
ing. The  two  women  also  reacted  with  deep  anguish. 
“Well,  we  won’t  take  you,”  they  were  told.  “We  will 
find  others.”  They  went  inside  the  “barrel”  by  using 
a ladder  with  three  steps.  The  ladder  moved  by  itself 
inside,  the  door  closed  by  itself,  like  an  elevator,  and 
the  craft  took  off  without  any  noise,  without  causing 
any  wind,  and  without  disturbing  the  sand  beneath 
it.  Soon  it  turned  into  a small  star. 

The  incident  was  investigated  by  Alexander  F.  Pu- 
gach,  who  holds  a Ph.D.  in  physics  and  mathematics 
and  is  a research  fellow  of  the  Department  of  Physics 
of  Stars  and  Galaxies  of  the  Ukrainian  SSR  Academy 
of  Sciences  Observatory.  Dr.  Pugach  was  familiar 
with  Western  research  of  UFOs  and  with  descriptions 
of  contactee  experiences.  He  believed  the  sighting 
to  be  genuine,  judging  from  several  small  details:  the 


38 


RULES  OF  ENGAGEMENT 


device  took  off  without  disturbing  the  sand;  the  boat 
was  without  sails,  oars,  or  engine;  the  beings  did  not 
show  any  emotions.  He  argued  that  no  physical  ap- 
paratus landed  in  the  park  and  later  took  off.  He 
thought,  however,  that  this  was  a real  phenomenon 
and  that  the  women  were  not  lying,  but  that  the  na- 
ture of  the  phenomenon  was  more  complex.  In  his 
opinion,  one  could  not  exclude  that  some  force,  some 
beings,  might  have  projected  the  scene  into  the  minds 
of  the  women.  In  other  words,  his  position  is  close  to 
the  views  of  those,  like  myself,  who  believe  that  UFOs 
are  from  a different  dimension  or  another  reality — 
although  in  my  opinion,  this  does  not  exclude  a ma- 
terial, physical  presence  at  the  time  of  the  sighting. 

“This  particular  abduction  mechanism  we  catego- 
rize as  Dialego,  the  dialogue,  because  it  usually  begins 
with  a verbal  exchange,”  Azhazha  told  us. 

“But  this  last  case  is  almost  like  a fairy  tale,”  I 
pointed  out.  “We  cannot  study  this  subject  as  a purely 
technical  problem.” 

“I  agree  with  you,”  answered  Azhazha.  “Ufology  is 
a complex  domain  that  demands  knowledge  of  bio- 
technology, of  space  physics,  and  of  psychology  and 
sociology.  We  need  a multidisciplinary  approach. 
Historians  and  folklore  experts  should  get  involved. 
We  need  psychics  and  we  need  physicists.  We  even 
need  philosophers.” 

The  representatives  from  Novosti  looked  at  their 
watches  and  indicated  that  it  was  time  for  lunch.  We 
could  continue  our  conversation  at  the  cafeteria,  they 
said,  and  in  the  afternoon  we  would  meet  with  the 
investigators  who  were  coming  from  Voronezh. 


/ 


✓ 


39 


CHAPTER  4 


THE  VORONEZH 
COLLECTIVE 


Suddenly  a light  appeared,  not  very  bright,  trembling 
and  flickering.  The  beam  came  down  and  it  slowly 
moved  along  the  ground  toward  us.  It  seemed  strange 
that  the  surface  touched  by  the  ray  was  full  of  bluish 
sparkles,  and  everything  was  quivering  as  if  one  was  in 
a haze  on  a hot  day.  . . . When  the  beam  approached 
the  car  I experienced  an  unpleasant  feeling  of  fear  and 
loss  of  self-confidence. 

Voronezh  witness  M.  N.  Polyakov 
September  1989 

On  September  27,  at  about  7:00  p.m.,  I was  walking  in 
the  area  of  the  park.  Suddenly  I noticed  a luminous 
ball  sweeping  past  on  a northerly  course  at  an  extraor- 
dinary speed,  strictly  horizontally  at  an  altitude  of 
roughly  six  hundred  feet.  I estimated  its  diameter  to  be 
about  forty-five  feet.  . . . Lieutenant  Sergei  Malveyev 

Voronezh  Militia 

F our  members  of  the  Voronezh  collective,  a regional 
investigation  group,  were  waiting  for  us  when  we  re- 
turned from  lunch.  They  were  typical  Soviet  engi- 


40 


THE  VORONEZH  COLLECTIVE 


neers,  businesslike  and  practical.  After  the  formal 
introductions  they  told  us  that  they  belonged  to  an 
autonomous  UFO  group  formed  under  the  auspices  of 
the  Radio-Engineering,  Electronics,  and  Communi- 
cations Society,  the  Soviet  equivalent  of  the  American 
Institute  of  Electronic  and  Electrical  Engineers.  The 
group  included  Alexander  Mosolov,  an  aviation  engi- 
neer; Vyacheslav  Martynov,  chief  engineer  at  an  aero- 
nautical plant;  and  Dr.  Yuri  Lozovtsev,  who  held  a 
Ph.D.  in  engineering  and  was  a specialist  in  materials 
science.  The  fourth  man  was  a journalist  from  the 
Voronezh  television  station,  who  recorded  a short  in- 
terview with  us.  I found  it  ironic  that  Martine  and  I, 
who  had  come  all  the  way  to  the  Soviet  Union  to  un- 
derstand the  local  wave  of  sightings,  would  end  up 
being  interviewed  for  the  benefit  of  the  people  of  Vo- 
ronezh. 

Soon  the  television  interview  was  over,  the  cameras 
were  put  away,  and  we  got  down  to  business. 

WHAT  HAPPENED  AT  VORONEZH 

As  we  review  the  events  that  took  place  in  that  region, 
it  is  important  to  remember  that  Voronezh  is  not  a 
small  village  but  a large  city  of  nearly  a million  in- 
habitants. Founded  as  a fortress  in  the  late  sixteenth 
century,  today  it  is  an  industrial  center  for  machin- 
ery, electrical  products,  chemicals,  cigarettes,  and 
processed  foods. 

The  first  report  of  the  UFO  incident  in  Voronezh 
appeared  in  the  local  newspaper  Kommuna .u  Written 
by  A.  Mosolov  and  entitled  “A  Soccer  Game  with 
Aliens,”  the  article  told  about  the  object  seen  on  Sep- 
tember 27,  1989,  at  about  6:30  in  the  evening,  while 


41 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


schoolchildren  Vasya  Surin  and  Genya  Blinov  played 
soccer  in  South  Park.  But  they  were  not  the  only  wit- 
nesses. A girl  named  Julia  Sholokhova  and  approxi- 
mately forty  adults  observed  the  strange  occurrence. 
That  was  one  of  the  facts  missed  by  the  Western  me- 
dia, who  kept  talking  derisively  about  “a  UFO  seen 
by  a bunch  of  kids.” 

The  witnesses  related  that  they  first  saw  a pink  or 
red  light  in  the  sky,  which  turned  into  a dark  red 
sphere,  about  thirty  feet  in  diameter.  The  object  was 
circling  forty  feet  above  the  ground,  and  witnesses 
could  see  that  the  grass  under  it  was  affected.  Soon 
the  sphere  flew  away. 

A few  minutes  later  the  UFO  returned  and  hovered 
above  the  park.  By  then  the  adults  had  joined  the 
teenagers.  Everyone  saw  a hatch  open  in  the  bottom 
section  of  the  sphere.  A being  appeared.  It  was  nearly 
ten  feet  tall  and  was  wearing  silver-colored  overalls 
and  bronze-colored  boots.  The  being  seemed  to  have 
three  eyes  and  a sort  of  disk-shaped  object  on  its  chest. 
It  appeared  to  scan  the  terrain,  then  closed  the  hatch. 
The  sphere  came  lower.  As  it  did,  it  brushed  against 
a poplar  tree,  which  was  bent  and  stayed  in  that  po- 
sition. 

The  UFO,  which  measured  about  forty-five  feet  by 
nineteen  feet,  landed.  The  being  emerged,  accompa- 
nied by  an  entity  that  looked  like  a robot.  The  alien 
J uttered  something  and  a luminous  rectangle,  about 
two  and  a half  feet  by  four  feet,  appeared  on  the 
ground.  The  alien  said  something  else  and  the  lumi- 
nous rectangle  disappeared.  The  alien  adjusted  some- 
thing on  the  robot’s  chest,  causing  it  to  walk  in  a 
mechanical  way. 

It  was  at  this  moment  that  one  of  the  boys  cried 


42 


THE  VORONEZH  COLLECTIVE 


out  in  fear.  The  alien  simply  looked  at  him  and  the 
boy  instantly  froze,  unable  to  move.  The  eyes  of  the 
alien  seemed  to  be  emitting  light.  Everyone  started 
shouting.  Somehow  the  sphere  and  the  beings  van- 
ished on  the  spot. 

Five  minutes  later  the  sphere  and  the  three-eyed 
being  appeared  again,  just  as  strangely  as  they  had 
disappeared.  The  being  now  had  at  his  side  a tube 
about  four  feet  in  length.  A sixteen-year-old  boy  was 
close  to  the  scene.  The  alien  pointed  his  “rifle”  toward 
the  teenager,  and  the  boy  instantly  disappeared.  The 
alien  entered  the  sphere  and  the  sphere  flew  away, 
gradually  increasing  its  speed.  At  the  same  instant  the 
vanished  teenager  reappeared. 

The  story,  as  reported  in  the  article,  ended  with 
two  statements:  (1)  that  the  above  was  written  after 
interviewing  multiple  eyewitnesses  and  (2)  that  Vo- 
ronezh residents  had  observed  UFOs  not  once,  but 
many  times  over  the  period  of  September  23  to  29. 

On  October  7,  1989,  Kommuna  continued  a dis- 
cussion of  local  observations  of  UFOs  in  an  article 
entitled  “What  Was  It?”15  The  story  was  written  by 
O.  Donin,  a reporter  for  the  newspaper,  who  men- 
tioned statements  made  by  two  adults:  Yuri  Vokhri- 
menko  had  seen  a red  sphere  in  the  sky  from  his 
balcony  on  September  27  at  approximately  the  same 
time  as  the  teenagers  in  the  park;  another  witness 
named  B.  G.  Yatsunov,  a former  pilot,  had  also  seen 
a UFO  on  September  29  at  8:10  p.m. 

The  rest  of  the  article  consisted  of  an  interview  with 
Professor  Genrikh  Silanov,  a physicist  from  the  Spec- 
tral Analysis  Laboratory  of  the  Voronezh  Geophysical 
Institute  and  a member  of  the  Section  on  the  Study  of 
Anomalous  Phenomena  of  the  Society  for  Radio- 


43 


Fig.  2.  Drawing  of  the  Voronezh  object  and  of  the  robot  oc- 
cupant seen  by  Roma  Torshin,  a sixth  grader.  Note  the  ab- 
sence of  any  symbol  or  insignia. 


Engineering,  Electronics,  and  Communication.  He 
related  that  at  least  three  landings  of  UFOs  had  taken 
place  in  Voronezh.  The  earliest  one  had  been  ob- 
served on  September  21  at  8:30  p.m.  by  boys  from 
Mendeleyev  Street.  A sphere  had  landed,  and  two  hu- 
manoids and  a robot  had  emerged  from  it. 

According  to  Silanov,  the  investigators  had  been 
able  to  trace  the  outlines  of  one  of  the  landing  sites 
through  the  use  of  biolocation  techniques;  it  was  a 
circle  sixty  feet  in  diameter.  Within  this  circle  a dows- 
ing rod  gave  a “definite  response,”  he  said.  Investi- 
gators also  used  a device  developed  by  Silanov  to 
measure  the  bioenergy  of  humans.  They  found  that 
inside  the  circle  the  bioenergy  level  was  nil.  Silanov 
reported  that  this  effect  had  been  observed  previously 
at  several  UFO  landing  sites. 

Within  the  circle  investigators  later  found  four  de- 
pressions in  the  ground,  each  about  two  inches  deep 
and  six  inches  in  diameter.  The  depressions  were  lo- 


44 


THE  VORONEZH  COLLECTIVE 


cated  at  the  four  points  of  a diamond-shaped  geomet- 
ric figure.  Again,  by  using  biolocation,  Silanov 
claimed  that  he  reconstructed  the  actual  path  of  the 
humanoids  who  took  several  steps  away  from  the 
craft.  The  path  later  shown  by  the  boys  who  had  seen 
the  beings  was  exactly  the  same,  he  said,  although 
they  were  not  aware  of  the  biolocation  findings. 

In  an  interview  with  the  Soviet  national  daily  Iz- 
vestia,  Vladimir  Azhazha  summarized  the  observa- 
tions in  Voronezh  and  wisely  added,  “I  personally 
believe  that  it  would  be  a mistake  to  interpret  these 
facts  as  evidence  of  visits  by  extraterrestrial  aliens;  our 
knowledge  is  still  too  limited  for  any  convincing  sci- 
entific interpretation.”16 

THE  INVESTIGATIONS  BEGIN 

On  October  11,  1989,  the  newspaper  Selskaya  Zhizn 
published  an  interesting  article  in  which  S.  Plotnikov 
summarized  his  interviews  of  the  eyewitnesses  in  Vo- 
ronezh over  the  period  September  21  to  October  7 and 
named  the  primary  observers.  The  article  noted  that 
among  those  who  saw  a red  sphere  about  thirty-five 
feet  in  diameter,  at  an  altitude  of  a thousand  feet, 
were  economist  V.  A.  Agibalova  and  her  daughter, 
Tatiana;  an  employee  of  the  local  power  sta- 
tion, I.  V.  Nikitina;  a retired  woman,  Y.  T.  Illarion- 
ova; a graduate  student  of  the  Veronezh  Engineering 
Construction  Institute,  I.  Alexseichev;  and  the  chief 
engineer  of  the  Design  Institute,  Y.  N.  Sviridov.  All 
these  people  observed  the  object  on  various  days,  be- 
tween 6:00  and  9:00  p.m.17 

Clearly,  the  idea  of  a few  teenagers  fantasizing 


45 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


about  giants  in  the  park  had  to  be  eliminated.  An- 
other Western  media  fact  was  biting  the  dust  of  re- 
ality. 

V.  A.  Kugatov,  a specialist  in  geodesics  from  the 
Agricultural  Research  Institute,  observed  a UFO  on 
September  24  at  approximately  10:30  a.m.  That  par- 
ticular UFO  resembled  a giant  airship  and  was  flying 
very  fast.  It  moved  first  to  the  east  and  then  to  the 
west. 

The  article  also  provided  additional  details  about 
the  schoolchildren  who  made  the  initial  reports.  On 
September  21,  the  landing  was  observed  by  seventh- 
grade  students  (approximately  thirteen  years  old) 
A.  Lukin,  Y.  Levchenko,  and  S.  Borisenko.  Eleven- 
year-old  Vasya  Surin,  who  saw  the  landing  on  Sep- 
tember 27,  was  in  the  fifth  grade  and  his  friend  Genya 
Blinov,  in  the  sixth.  The  author  related  Silanov’s  ob- 
servations of  the  site  and  added  that,  in  addition  to 
four  depressions,  holes  in  the  ground  had  been  found, 
“as  if  someone  had  taken  a soil  sample.” 

In  a local  Voronezh  newspaper,  Molodoy  Kommu- 
nar,  journalist  Eugene  Buslayev  interviewed  Alexan- 
der Mosolov  and  Vyacheslav  Martynov.18  They  de- 
scribed the  field  studies  that  used  dowsing.  They 
also  related  another  interesting  detail:  when  they 
used  a magnetometer  and  attempted  to  measure  the 
intensity  of  the  magnetic  field  at  the  landing  site, 
the  intensity  turned  out  to  be  so  high  that  it  was 
beyond  the  scale  of  the  device.  Their  colleague, 
Dr.  Yuri  Lozovtsev,  calculated  the  pressure  on  the 
ground  from  the  shape  and  dimensions  of  the  de- 
pressions and  came  up  with  the  figure  of  eleven 
tons,  assuming  it  was  caused  by  static  pressure,  that 
is,  by  the  actual  weight  of  the  apparatus.  That 


46 


THE  VORONEZH  COLLECTIVE 


weight  is  in  the  range  of  estimates  reached  by  French 
scientists  who  have  studied  physical  traces  from 
UFO  landings  at  sites  like  Quarouble  and  Trans-en- 
Provence. 


THREE  TYPES  OF  UFO  ENTITIES 

The  Soviet  researchers  also  related  that  eyewitnesses 
of  four  landings  described  not  one  but  three  different  ^ 
kinds  of  beings  who  had  emerged  from  the  various 
UFOs  seen  at  Voronezh.  The  first  kind  consisted  of 
ten-foot-tall  beings  with  three  eyes.  Two  of  the  eyes 
were  whitish;  the  third,  in  the  middle,  was  red  and 
devoid  of  a pupil.  The  second  kind  was  a robot,  ac- 
tually a box  with  something  resembling  a head  on  the 
top  of  it.  In  one  of  the  observations  no  head  was  seen. 
Instead  there  were  two  antennae  on  the  top  of  the 
box. 

In  a typical  observation,  a hatch  in  the  sphere 
opened,  a small  metal  ladder  appeared  from  the 
hatch,  and  two  tall  beings  brought  a robot  out  from 
the  sphere.  The  robot  had  knobs  on  its  chest.  A tall 
being  touched  some  of  the  knobs,  and  the  robot  began 
walking  in  a mechanical  way.  In  ten  to  twenty  min- 
utes the  robot  returned  to  the  three-eyed  beings,  who 
turned  it  off  and  carried  it  back  into  the  sphere.  The 
ladder  then  automatically  went  inside,  the  hatch 
closed,  and  the  UFO  rose  from  the  ground.  Almost 
instantaneously  it  became  a mere  dot  and  disappeared 
in  the  sky. 

Readers  of  my  book  Confrontations  may  recall  a 
very  similar  case  that  took  place  in  Venado  Tuerto, 
Argentina.  In  that  sighting  a boy  named  Oscar,  whom 
my  wife,  Janine,  and  I personally  interviewed  at  the 


47 


/ 


Fig.  3.  Drawing  of  the  Voronezh  object  and  of  the  being  seen 
by  Genya  Blinov,  who  observed  “two  eyes  and  slightly  above 
them  a red  lamp.”  Note  that  no  insignia  was  reported  on  the 
object. 


site  of  the  encounter,  saw  a landed  craft  with  a “gi- 
ant” and  a robot  companion. 

The  third  kind  of  beings  seen  at  Voronezh  were 
small,  with  grayish-green  faces  and  blue  overcoats 
that  looked  like  loose  raincoats.  They  had  two  eyes. 

Another  Soviet  paper,  Meditsinskaya  Gazeta,  sent 
reporter  Valery  Milyutin  to  Voronezh.  He  inter- 
viewed several  adult  eyewitnesses  who  saw  the  UFOs, 
adding  many  useful  details.19 

Thus  Yuri  Petrovich  Vokhrimenko  gave  the  follow- 
ing statement: 


On  September  27,  between  6:00  and  7:00  p.m.,  I saw 
from  my  balcony  a reddish  sphere  appearing  over  the 
horizon.  It  flew  at  a relatively  low  altitude  toward  the 
left  bank  of  the  river,  hovering  over  the  village  of 
Otrozhka,  and  then  it  disappeared  behind  the  houses. 
It  was  not  moving  fast.  It  flew  at  the  speed  of  a small 
plane. 


48 


THE  VORONEZH  COLLECTIVE 


Valentina  Alexeyevna  Agibalova,  a senior  econo- 
mist at  the  State  Bank  Computer  Center,  and  her 
daughter,  Tatiana,  a deputy  prosecutor  of  the  Zhelez- 
nodorozhny  District  in  Voronezh,  stated: 

On  September  27,  around  7:00  p.m.,  we  saw  a red- 
colored  sphere  flying  from  Shilovsky  forest  toward  the 
Voronezh  hydroelectric  power  station.  It  hovered  over 
the  left  riverbank  and  then  vanished.  [The  Russian 
word  literally  describes  a light  going  out.]  Then  it  re- 
appeared and  moved  back  toward  the  forest. 

Inna  Vladimirovna  Nikitina,  an  employee  of 
Voronezh-Energo,  the  local  power  station,  said: 


Around  9:00  p.m.,  for  five  to  ten  minutes,  I observed 
a fairly  large  flattened  sphere,  shaped  like  an  orange. 
This  happened  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mining  equip- 
ment plant.  I experienced  a feeling  of  intense  fear  for 
which  I could  not  account. 


Yuli  Nikanorovich  Sviridov,  chief  engineer  of  the 
Trans-Electro-Project  Design  Institute  stated: 

Around  8:00  p.m.,  on  September  27,  from  the  fourth 
floor  balcony,  I saw  a big,  bright  red  sphere  move 
between  the  houses  at  an  altitude  of  a thousand  feet, 
with  a crimson  halo  along  the  edges.  Its  speed  was 
comparable  to  that  of  a small  plane.  It  was  moving 
from  the  left  bank  of  the  river  in  a westerly  direction. 

What  we  have  here  is  a case  of  highly  qualified 
multiple  witnesses  to  a series  of  physical  events  for 
which  there  is  no  current  scientific  explanation. 


49 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


THE  CASE  OF 
THE  PARALYZING  RAY 

Another  witness,  M.  N.  Polyakov,  a factory  worker, 
reported  one  of  the  most  remarkable  episodes  in  the 
whole  series.  His  statement  runs  this  way: 

At  the  end  of  September  we  were  driving  to  the  south- 
ern suburb  of  Voronezh.  All  of  a sudden  our  head- 
lights went  out.  The  radio  died  out  in  the  middle  of 
a song.  The  engine  died,  too.  The  car  coasted,  giving 
us  a chance  to  get  on  the  shoulder  of  the  road.  We 
tried  to  turn  the  ignition  key  back  and  forth  in  vain. 
The  driver  wanted  to  have  a smoke,  but  the  car  lighter 
\J  did  not  work.  He  took  out  some  matches,  but  they 
would  not  ignite.  The  driver  threw  away  his  cigarette 
in  frustration  and  he  went  out  to  take  a look  under 
the  hood.  And  then  I heard  his  voice,  with  a tone  of 
intense  surprise:  “Look,  look,  quick!” 

He  stood  there  with  his  arm  outstretched,  pointing 
toward  the  sky  behind  the  car.  I turned  around  and 
saw  a pinkish-yellow  sphere  shining  dimly  above  the 
road  about  three  hundred  feet  away.  It  was  hard  to 
tell  its  size  because  of  the  distance,  but  I am  certain 
that  its  diameter  was  over  thirty  feet.  At  the  bottom 
of  the  sphere  there  was  a protuberance  that  reminded 
me  of  a ball-shaped  growth  on  a tree.  Suddenly  a light 
appeared  from  it,  not  very  bright,  trembling  and 
flickering.  The  beam  came  down  and  slowly  moved 
along  the  ground  toward  us.  It  seemed  strange  that 
the  surface  touched  by  the  ray  was  full  of  bluish  spar- 
kles, and  everything  was  quivering  as  if  we  were  in  a 
haze  on  a hot  day.  Once  in  a while  there  was  a blind- 
ing flash  that  was  reflected  by  the  surface.  When  the 
beam  approached  the  car  I experienced  an  unpleasant 
fear.  I felt  constrained.  I did  not  want  to  move  or  to 


50 


THE  VORONEZH  COLLECTIVE 


do  anything.  My  good  mood  disappeared  without  a 
trace. 

The  ray  moved  over  to  the  car  hood.  The  engine 
started  to  smoke  the  way  it  does  when  the  radiator  is 
overheated.  There  was  a feeling  of  something  slipping 
in.  The  car  moved  and  something  appeared  on  the 
driver’s  seat.  I sensed  an  alien  presence;  I felt  that  I 
could  stretch  my  arm  and  touch  the  invisible  being. 
And  although  my  brain  and  my  willpower  ordered 
my  hand  to  touch  the  unpleasant  thing,  I could  not 
move  my  arm.  What  was  it?  Fear?  Was  I like  a rabbit 
hypnotized  by  a cobra? 

Then  the  ray  moved  away.  Then  I could  breathe 
easier.  For  several  seconds  it  was  dark  and  quiet,  and 
then,  great!  The  dashboard  lit  up!  The  radio  came 
back  on  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  The  driver  turned 
on  the  engine. 

Now  everything  was  back  to  normal.  My  fingers 
were  tingling  as  they  do  during  a cramp.  The  driver 
was  silent,  but  I was  dying  of  curiosity.  “What  could 
all  this  mean?”  I asked  him. 

“What  are  you  talking  about?” 

“About  the  ball.” 

“What  ball?” 

“The  one  above  us,  when  we  stopped.” 

“Did  we  stop?”  He  seemed  surprised. 

Now  it  was  my  turn  to  be  surprised.  Maybe  I should 
go  to  a doctor,  I thought.  Maybe  I am  a little  tired? 
Or  maybe  I just  fell  asleep?  We  approached  the  street- 
car stop.  I got  on,  and  when  I reached  for  the  handle 
there  was  a powerful  spark  between  my  fingers  and 
the  metal.  I felt  a strong  and  unpleasant  electric  shock. 

I came  home  and  when  I put  the  key  into  the  key- 
hole I got  another  powerful  shock.  All  night  long  I 
had  unusual  dreams.  I woke  up  with  a headache.  And 
then  exactly  at  noon  I suddenly  felt  fine. 


51 


r 


7^ 

% - 0*0 

, — s 

\ M ^ UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

I am  fifty-six  years  old  and  nothing  unusual  has  ever 
happened  to  me.  I am  almost  perfectly  healthy,  and 
I had  no  intention  of  telling  that  story  to  the  press: 
people  might  think  that  I am  a lunatic.  But  my  friends 
convinced  me. 

The  author  of  the  article,  Valery  Milyutin,  con- 
cluded with  the  opinion  of  O.  V.  Stolyarov,  depart- 
ment head  at  the  newspaper  Kommuna,  who  has 
studied  such  anomalous  phenomena  for  several  years: 

The  celebrated  Russian  scientist  Konstantin  Tsiolkov- 
sky  admitted  the  possibility  that  space  and  time  were 
multidimensional.  Moreover,  he  thought  that  ethereal 
beings  could  live  in  a parallel  dimension  to  ours.  Why 
don’t  we  see  them?  Perhaps  one  of  the  most  convinc- 
ing answers  has  been  offered  by  one  of  the  leading 
authorities  on  this  issue,  an  Academician  of  the  Sibe- 
rian Branch  of  the  USSR  Academy  of  Medical  Sci- 
ences, Vlail  P.  Kaznacheyev.  He  is  convinced  that 
ancient  people  were  capable  of  sensing  one  another  at 
huge  distances.  Then  this  ability  was  lost  by  most  peo- 
ple. Maybe  that  is  why  some  people  see  humanoid 

! beings  and  others  do  not. 

We  spent  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  discussing  the 
reality  of  the  observations  at  Voronezh.  We  probed, 
we  argued,  we  debated.  As  the  next  chapter  shows, 
our  conversations  with  the  Voronezh  collective  only 
deepened  the  sense  of  mystery  attached  to  the  sight- 
ings. 


52 


Martine  Castello  and  Jacques  Vallee  in  Moscow  in  January  1990. 


Jacques  Vallee  in  conversation  with  Vladimir  Azhazha. 

This  painting  of  a close  encounter  during  the  1989  wave  in  the  Soviet  Union  is  part  of  the 
Cosmos  exhibit  in  Moscow.  The  attempted  abduction  happened  near  Kiev,  on  July  4, 1989. 


Meeting 
with  the 
Voronezh 
collective. 


Arguing  about  the  use  of  biolocation  techniques  at  Voronezh. 

Artist's  rendition  of  the  Voronezh  landing  based  on  reports  by  witnesses.  Note  the  UMMO 
symbol  on  the  belts  of  the  alleged  aliens 


A portrait  of  the  writer  Alexander  Kazantsev. 

Porphyry  Ivanov,  the  founder  of  a Soviet  UFO  contact  cult. 


Some  of  Ivanov’s  followers  practice  bathing  in  icy  waters  and  walking  naked  through  the 
snow  while  they  wait  for  the  next  contact  with  extraterrestrials. 


At  Novosti,  debating  UFO  phenomena.  Alexei  Konin,  the  young  journalist  standing  at  right, 
was  a witness  of  unexplained  objects  in  the  Perm  region. 


A luminous  object  seen  in  a clearing 
during  the  1989  Russian  wave.  The 
face  of  the  humanoid  "occupant" 
was  also  described  as  emitting  light. 


During  a research  trip  to  the  Perm 
region  in  the  middle  of  winter  a 
member  of  Novosti  took  this 
photograph  of  a globe  of  light  in 
close  proximity  to  another  member 
of  the  expedition,  who  actually  saw 
the  object. 


*1 


A group  of  investigators  in  a clearing  in  the  Urals,  with  unexplained  light  phenomena 
evolving  around  them. 

A luminous  object  flies  over  the  forest  in  the  Perm  region. 


T 


j 


This  photograph  was  given  to  me  hy  a Russian  journalist  as  "evidence"  of  unexplained 
energy  fields  near  Perm.  It  is  obviously  a short  time  exposure  of  a beautiful  but  perfectly 
ordinary  auroral  display.  Any  amateur  astronomer  would  recognize  the  Big  Dipper  in  the  sky, 
showing  that  the  camera  was  pointing  north.  The  length  of  the  star  trails  establishes  the 
duration  of  the  exposure.  But  why  were  we  told  that  there  was  anything  unusual  about  this 
photograph?  Perhaps  we  were  being  tested. 


The  Moscow  symposium  of  January  12, 1990. 


CHAPTER  5 

THE  VORONEZH 
INVESTIGATIONS 


Over  thirty  people  have  witnessed  the  landings  in  Vo- 
ronezh. Thousands  have  seen  the  objects  in  flight. 

Aviation  Engineer  Alexander  Mosolov 

I don’t  know  what  actually  happened  here,  but  an  in- 
crease in  the  radioactive  background  is  in  evidence. 

What  is  the  reason? 

Colonel  Lyudmila  Makarova, 

head  of  the  Criminal  Expertise  Department, 

Voronezh  Internal  Affairs 

,fT 

I he  center  of  the  activity  varies  within  the  city  of 
Voronezh  itself,”  Alexander  Mosolov  told  us  after  we 
had  reviewed  the  background  of  the  various  cases.  “It 
moves  from  the  park  to  the  power  plant.  Many  of  the 
sightings  seem  to  occur  in  polluted  areas.  The  park 
itself  used  to  be  a garbage  dump.  It  was  covered  over 
with  dirt  and  planted.  Similarly,  the  electrical  plant 
and  the  site  of  the  future  nuclear  plant  have  been  vis- 
ited.” With  a trace  of  frustration  in  his  voice  he  added: 
“We  do  not  know  what  all  that  means.” 

53 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“How  did  you  first  hear  about  the  case?”  we  asked 
the  group. 

Mosolov  was  the  first  to  answer.  “You  see,  I live  in 
the  part  of  town  where  the  children  had  the  first  close 
encounter,”  he  said.  “One  of  the  kids’  mothers  told 
me  about  it,  and  I went  to  the  site  the  very  next  day. 
But  we  found  out  that  the  sightings  in  the  area  had 
actually  begun  back  in  August.  Over  thirty  people 
have  witnessed  the  landings  in  Voronezh.  Thousands 
have  seen  the  objects  in  flight.” 

“And  the  wave  isn’t  over  yet,”  pointed  out  Vyache- 
slav Martynov. 


QUESTIONS  OF  METHODOLOGY 

“What  was  your  methodology  in  the  Voronezh  case?” 

“We  began  with  the  schoolchildren,”  answered 
Mosolov.  “We  separated  them.  We  found  out  that 
many  of  them  did  not  know  the  others.  We  had  them 
make  separate  drawings,  and  we  videotaped  them 
while  they  were  being  interviewed.  We  will  show  you 
the  tape  later.” 

“What  did  they  actually  draw?”  asked  Martine.  I 
knew  that,  like  me,  she  was  anxious  to  find  out  if  the 
symbols  reported  by  the  kids  were  genuine. 

The  men  from  Voronezh  had  brought  some  of  the 
original  drawings  and  paintings.  They  started  spread- 
ing them  on  the  table  before  us. 

“They  drew  classical  shapes,  as  you  can  see.  A 
sphere  or  a disk,  resting  on  four  legs.  And  indeed  we 
found  four  imprints  in  the  ground,”  pointed  out  Dr. 
Yuri  Lozovtsev. 

“The  humanoids  are  similar  in  all  the  drawings,” 
added  Martynov.  “They  have  no  neck,  their  head  rests 


54 


□» 

Fig.  4.  Diagram  of  traces  found  in  the  first  Voronezh  landing 
in  South  Park: 

A,  B,  C,  D:  rectangular  imprints 
E:  area  of  flattened  grass 

F : epicenter,  radioactivity  level  double  that  of  the  background 
Gl,  G2:  holes  fifteen  inches  deep,  vertical  and  smooth 


on  their  shoulders.  They  look  like  a target  at  a firing 
range.” 

“What  about  the  eyes?  Is  it  true  that  the  witnesses 
described  three  eyes?” 

“Some  of  them  did,  but  others  saw  two  eyes  and 
something  else  on  the  forehead,  which  could  have 
been  a device  of  some  sort.” 

“Tell  us  more  about  the  physical  traces  in  South 
Park,”  I insisted.  The  group  was  eager  to  comply.  Af- 
ter all,  they  were  all  technicians,  trained  in  hard  sci- 
ence. In  that  respect  we  were  speaking  the  same 
language. 

“We  measured  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  field 


55 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


and  the  parameters  of  ground  magnetism.  We  found 
the  traces  of  the  craft’s  four  legs,  which  were  an  inch 
and  a half  deep.  And  we  took  many  soil  samples  for 
analysis.” 

“Was  there  any  evidence  of  a rise  in  temperature?” 
I asked,  thinking  of  the  Trans-en-Provence  case  where 
French  government  scientists  had  found  evidence  of 
heating  to  600°  Celsius. 

“No,”  was  the  answer.  “But  the  soil  had  turned  to 
the  consistency  of  stone,  and  there  was  an  area  of  flat- 
tened grass.” 

“We  computed  the  total  weight  of  the  object,” 
added  Lozovtsev.  “As  we  mentioned  before,  we  found 
eleven  tons,  which  is  consistent  with  some  of  the  es- 
timates you  have  given  in  your  work  from  French  en- 
counters. Of  course,  this  is  only  an  approximation. 
The  object  may  not  have  rested  on  the  ground  with 
its  full  weight.” 

Martynov  chipped  in  with  more  astonishing  data. 
“The  background  radiation  was  in  the  range  of  ten  to 
fifteen  microroentgen  per  hour,  while  the  measure- 
ments taken  on  the  trace  itself  were  between  thirty 
and  thirty-seven.  Although  it  doesn’t  pose  a threat  to 
people’s  health,  such  an  increase  is  clearly  signifi- 
cant.” 

“Can  you  trust  the  children’s  testimony?”  I asked. 

Lozovtsev  was  quick  to  reply.  “It  is  hard  to  deny 
the  initial  sightings,  since  there  were  physical  traces 
and  also  adult  witnesses.  But  in  the  following  days 
there  were  other  reports  from  children  and  we  do  not 
trust  those  reports.  For  example,  the  press  stated  that 
a sixteen-year-old  boy  had  suddenly  seen  an  object  ap- 
pear close  to  a tree  . . . that  may  have  been  an  inven- 
tion.” 


56 


THE  VORONEZH  INVESTIGATIONS 


“What  about  the  sightings  by  adults?” 

“Those  are  not  in  doubt.  There  were  simply  too 
many  witnesses,  and  we  have  their  statements  on  rec- 
ord. For  instance,  there  is  a case  where  the  first  wit- 
ness, a mother  of  ten,  was  getting  everything  ready 
for  a family  celebration  when  she  saw  something  fly- 
ing over  adjacent  buildings.  Soon  there  was  a crowd 
of  five  hundred  other  witnesses.  The  object  was  seen 
for  two  and  a half  hours!  It  was  a dark  disk  with  three 
blinking  lights:  red,  yellow,  and  green.” 

“Did  any  of  the  cases  involve  a beam  of  light,  other 
than  Polyakov’s  experience?” 

“Yes.  Near  a lake  called  Vor’s  Sea  several  women 
saw  a beam  coming  from  above.  It  hit  the  water  and 
continued  inside  the  lake.  They  were  not  caught  in 
the  beam,  but  they  suffered  strong  headaches  none- 
theless.” 

“There  were  other  cases  of  high  strangeness,”  con- 
tinued Mosolov.  “One  of  them  involved  a lens-shaped 
discoid  object,  about  twenty  feet  in  diameter,  that 
took  off  from  a platform  that  seemed  to  be  set  on 
wheels  ...  I have  spoken  with  the  witness  myself. 
The  platform  simply  vanished  on  the  spot.  I would 
have  had  trouble  believing  this,  except  that  a round 
trace  was  left  in  the  grass,  with  the  vegetation  bent 
in  a spiral  as  if  a giant  comb  had  been  run  through 
it.” 

Now  the  conversation  became  general. 

“There  were  also  some  reports  of  direct  contact,” 
Martynov  said.  “The  most  recent  one  took  place  less 
than  a week  ago,  last  Wednesday.  A forty-year-old 
woman  who  was  in  her  house  with  her  son  saw  a 
pinkish-colored  light  behind  the  window.  Next  she  de- 
scribed three  dark  silhouettes  that  had  neither  eyes 


57 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


nor  ears.  They  seemed  to  be  calling  her.  We  found 
that  this  woman  was  in  good  mental  and  physical 
health.  Until  that  sighting  she  had  always  refused  to 
believe  in  UFOs.  The  experience  lasted  an  hour,  and 
during  all  that  time  she  couldn’t  move  from  her  bed.” 

Evidently  the  Voronezh  group  had  been  serious, 
thorough,  and  diligent  in  its  work.  But  a number  of 
problems  still  had  no  solutions. 

UNRESOLVED  QUESTIONS 

“There  are  two  aspects  of  the  case  that  we  do  not 
understand,”  I said  after  exchanging  a quick  glance 
with  Martine.  “The  first  has  to  do  with  the  use  of 
biolocation  to  study  the  site,  and  the  second  has  to  do 
with  the  symbol  that  the  witnesses  have  drawn  on 
their  representations  of  the  craft.” 

Again,  everyone  jumped  into  the  conversation,  so 
that  the  interpreters  had  trouble  following  what  was 
said.  We  did  gather  that  Professor  Genrikh  Silanov 
had  performed  the  dowsing  studies. 

“Silanov  has  a long  experience  with  this  technique 
and  with  magnetism  generally,”  said  the  researchers. 
“He  used  it  in  Siberia  when  he  was  on  mineral  re- 
sources search  trips,  looking  for  metals.” 

Mosolov  drew  a rough  map  of  the  area.  Over  the 
next  half  hour  he  proceeded  to  explain  to  me  the  na- 
ture and  the  amplitude  of  the  “magnetic  signal”  Sil- 
anov had  found  in  the  vicinity  of  the  traces.  I must 
admit  that  this  was  one  of  the  most  confusing  aspects 
of  our  conversations  with  the  Soviet  investigators.  I 
had  the  impression  that  the  parameters  they  were  us- 
ing were  undefined  and  that  the  phenomena  they  were 
supposedly  measuring  were  poorly  calibrated.  If  there 


58 


THE  VORONEZH  INVESTIGATIONS 


was  an  effect,  I asked,  how  could  they  be  sure  that  it 
was  related  to  the  presence  of  an  object,  rather  than 
a more  mundane  cause,  like  underground  water  flow, 
or  a metallic  mass?  After  all,  the  park  had  been  built 
over  a landfill  that  used  to  be  a garbage  dump.  How 
did  they  know  what  it  was  they  were  measuring? 

“We  had  better  show  you  the  videotape,”  they  said. 
So  we  went  down  the  hall  to  one  of  the  modern  tele- 
vision studios  maintained  by  Novosti,  a room  filled 
from  floor  to  ceiling  with  the  latest  Japanese  video 
technology.  A moment  later  we  were  watching  Pro- 
fessor Silanov  walking  up  and  down  the  grassy  area 
where  the  sighting  had  taken  place,  carefully  holding 
in  his  hand  a bent,  L-shaped  metal  rod,  with  the  long- 
er part  of  the  rod  pointing  ahead  of  him.  Periodically 
it  would  deviate  to  the  left  or  to  the  right,  a fact  that 
was  duly  measured  and  noted. 

We  also  heard  and  watched  the  witnesses  of  the 
first  landing  being  interviewed.  They  seemed  to  be 
very  articulate,  and  showed  no  reluctance  to  describe 
what  they  had  seen. 

Yet  when  we  came  back  into  the  office  to  review 
the  case  one  more  time,  I continued  to  have  trouble 
with  the  Russian  concept  of  biolocation.  From  their 
point  of  view  it  seemed  as  obvious  as  measuring  elec- 
trical tension  with  a voltmeter.  From  my  point  of 
view,  I failed  to  see  any  calibration,  any  reliable  base- 
line to  their  measurements.  Obviously,  I was  missing 
something:  I could  not  see  how  they  could  relate  the 
movement  of  the  rod  to  the  possible  presence  or  ab- 
sence of  a UFO  in  that  park  several  days  earlier.  I still 
don’t.  From  a Western  scientist’s  point  of  view,  much 
of  the  Soviet  UFO  data  is  poorly  documented  and  of- 
ten surrounded  by  irrelevant  facts.  But  perhaps  seri- 


59 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


ous  Soviet  researchers  have  the  same  impression  of  the 
American  UFO  scene,  where  sloppy  hypnosis  of  ab- 
duction victims  and  garbled  reports  of  crashed  hu- 
manoids are  often  mixed  in  with  the  verified  reports 
in  the  literature. 

We  gave  up  on  the  biolocation  argument  and  began 
discussing  the  symbol  some  of  the  witnesses  had  drawn 
on  the  side  of  the  UFO.  Not  only  did  it  appear  on  the 
object,  but  it  was  also  on  the  belts  of  the  aliens  who 
were  seen  next  to  it.  Martine  cornered  the  represen- 
tatives from  Voronezh  and  told  them  about  her  own 
extensive  investigations  into  the  UMMO  cult  in  the 
West. 

“That  symbol  is  genuine,”  said  a member  of  the 
group.  “It  was  first  reported  in  our  region  in  a case 
that  dates  from  1984.” 

There  was  disagreement  on  this  point  among  the 
researchers  in  the  room.  A similar  symbol  had  been 
reported  on  May  22,  1979,  by  a Polish  citizen  named 
Woldemar  R.,  who  saw  it  on  a strange  object  that 
landed  in  a park  near  Warsaw.  When  Martine  pointed 
out  that  the  insignia  had  first  been  associated  with  a 
Spanish  episode  that  was  widely  regarded  as  an  out- 
right hoax,  Boris  Churinov,  from  an  investigation 
team  calling  itself  the  Twenty-First  Century  Group, 
said  that  years  before  he  had  published  a report  on 
UFO  shapes  that  included  the  UMMO  insignia.  That 
report  had  long  been  available  in  Voronezh,  he  added. 
Could  it  be  that  one  of  the  witnesses  had  remembered 
it  and  had  added  the  insignia  to  his  drawing  in  a mis- 
placed effort  to  increase  its  credibility? 

If  that  were  the  intent,  certainly  the  opposite  result 
had  been  obtained.  On  the  basis  of  that  drawing,  some 
of  my  scientist  friends  in  France  had  rejected  the 


60 


THE  VORONEZH  INVESTIGATIONS 


whole  Voronezh  affair,  hinting  darkly  that  perhaps 
Soviet  intelligence  agencies  were  behind  those  alleged 
messages  from  UMMO  as  well. 

It  was  a quarrel  we  did  not  resolve  that  day.  We 
came  away  convinced  that  a genuine  series  of  extraor- 
dinary phenomena  had  taken  place  in  Voronezh.  We 
believed  that  the  UMMO  symbol  was  a spurious  ad- 
dition, the  result  of  unfortunate  contamination  in- 
duced by  overenthusiastic  believers.  And  on  the  topic 
of  biolocation  we  found  ourselves  as  confused  as  ever. 
Perhaps  our  conversations  the  next  day  with  Professor 
Zolotov,  of  the  Geophysical  Institute  in  Kalinin  and 
an  expert  in  magnetism,  would  clarify  the  situation. 


61 


CHAPTER  6 


TUNGUSKA: 

THE  CONTINUING  ENIGMA 


Tonight  the  sky  is  covered  with  a dense  layer  of  clouds. 

It  is  still  pouring  rain,  and  yet  it  is  extraordinarily 
light.  In  fact,  it  is  so  light  that  outdoors  one  can  read 
small  newspaper  type  fairly  easily.  There  should  be  no 
moon,  but  the  clouds  are  illuminated  by  a sort  of 
yellowish-green  light  that  sometimes  turns  to  pink.  . . . 

Academician  A.  A.  Polkanov 
Siberia,  June  1908 

It  is  very  difficult  to  sweep  aside  the  explanation  that 
) the  Tungus  catastrophe  was  an  atomic  explosion.  The 
inquiring  mind  is  anxious  for  scientists  to  produce  the 
true  explanation.  Alexander  Kazantsev 

A Visitor  From  Outer  Space,  1966 

When  we  got  up  the  next  day,  the  little  corner  place 
at  the  end  of  the  long  hallway  at  our  hotel  had  run 
out  of  instant  coffee,  so  we  had  a quick  breakfast  of 
tea  and  dry  bread.  Conversation  was  not  about  para- 
normal phenomena  but  about  worsening  economic 
conditions,  the  failure  of  perestroika,  and  Gorba- 
chev’s future  at  the  head  of  an  empire  that  seemed 


62 


TUNGUSKA:  THE  CONTINUING  ENIGMA 


torn  apart  by  centrifugal  force.  The  weather,  too,  was 
getting  harsher,  and  we  bundled  up  in  scarves  and  fur 
hats  for  the  drive  to  Novosti. 

“I  can  talk  to  you  about  four  different  topics,”  said 
Professor  Alexis  Zolotov,  who  was  waiting  for  us  in 
Milyutenko’s  beautiful  office,  which  was  fast  becom- 
ing our  shelter  from  the  cold  and  dampness  of  Mos- 
cow. “We  can  discuss  the  Tunguska  disaster,  we  can 
discuss  biolocation,  or  we  can  turn  to  the  subject  of 
biological  fields  or  of  unidentified  flying  objects  in 
general.”  He  favored  us  with  a genial  smile. 

“Let’s  begin  with  Tunguska,”  I said  in  response  to 
this  gracious  opening.  “I  have  read  your  works  on  the 
subject.”20 

“You  mean  my  earlier  works.  You  are  probably  not 
aware  of  the  latest  developments.” 

Over  the  next  three  hours  we  discussed  Zolotov’s 
study  of  the  extraordinary  explosion  that  rocked  Si- 
beria in  1908. 

JUNE  30,  1908:  THE  EVIDENCE 

Believers  and  skeptics  alike  agree  that  the  major  frus- 
tration in  the  study  of  UFOs  comes  from  our  inability 
to  establish  firmly  the  physical  facts.  Even  in  a re- 
markable situation  like  the  Voronezh  case,  when  we 
have  actual  traces,  multiple  witnesses,  and  repeated 
events,  it  is  very  hard  to  come  away  with  the  proof 
that  a truly  paranormal  event  happened.  One  may  be 
personally  certain  that  it  did,  but  the  kind  of  evidence 
that  could  convince  the  scientific  world  to  sit  up  and 
take  notice  simply  does  not  yet  exist. 

It  is  this  feature  that  places  the  Tunguska  case  in  a 
class  by  itself.  No  scientist  could  deny  the  reality  of 


63 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


the  phenomenon.  The  only  disagreement  could  be  on 
the  various  hypotheses  created  to  explain  it. 

Everyone  also  agrees  on  the  date  and  the  exact  time: 
June  30,  1908,  at  7:00  a.m. 

The  reasons  for  such  an  exceptional  consensus  in  a 
field  known  for  its  controversies  and  endless  polemics 
are  very  simple.  Alexis  Zolotov,  who  had  personally 
traveled  to  the  site  in  1959  and  1960,  summarized 
them  for  us,  his  sharp  eyes  darting  from  Martine  to 
our  interpreter  and  then  to  me,  his  hands  smoothing 
his  long  gray  beard.  “It  began  with  a blinding  ball  of 
light,  brighter  than  the  sun,  that  appeared  over  the 
Siberian  taiga  near  Vanovara.  It  turned  into  a fiery 
column  rising  up  into  the  cloudless  sky.  Next,  a loud 
explosion  reverberated  several  times.  The  sound  was 
heard  as  far  as  750  miles  away.  The  earth  moved  and 
even  at  that  distance  chandeliers  swung  from  the  ceil- 
ings. Four  hundred  miles  away  a train  nearly  derailed 
under  the  shock.  The  engineer  actually  stopped  his 
engine,  wondering  what  had  happened.  Some  men 
who  were  riding  as  far  as  200  miles  away  were  thrown 
from  their  horses.  Windows  that  faced  toward  the  ex- 
plosion were  shattered  in  houses  150  miles  away.  Roofs 
were  torn  off  and  fences  were  uprooted  at  a distance 
of  sixty  miles  or  so.  Earth  tremors  were  recorded  in 
Irkutsk,  Tashkent,  as  well  as  Jena,  Germany.  The 
shock  wave,  recorded  by  a seismograph  in  London, 
circled  the  globe  twice.  Luminescent  clouds  were  ob- 
served and  even  photographed  over  Europe  and  North 
Africa.  Newspapers  could  be  read  at  night  by  the  light 
of  the  clouds.  So  you  can  see  it  was  hard  for  the  skep- 
tics to  deny  that  something  had  happened.” 

Pointing  to  a detailed  map  in  a copy  of  his  book  on 
the  Tunguska  catastrophe,  Zolotov  continued  his  de- 


64 


Fig.  5.  A map  of  the  region  where  the  unexplained  Tunguska 
catastrophe  took  place  in  June  1908. 


scription.  “Within  sixteen  miles  of  the  site  all  the  trees 
were  uprooted.  Within  ten  miles  they  were  burned  by 
luminous  radiation.  And  what  do  you  think  took  place 
at  the  very  center  of  all  that  unprecedented  destruc- 
tion? Nothing!  Nothing  at  all.  There  was  no  crater, 
and  the  trees  themselves  were  left  standing.” 

“Is  there  a hypothesis  to  account  for  these  effects?” 
asked  Martine. 


65 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Zolotov  seemed  to  think  this  question  was  very 
funny.  His  eyes  sparkled  and  he  leaned  back  in  his 
armchair  as  he  replied.  “Of  course  there  is!  You  know 
how  we  scientists  are.  Not  one,  or  a dozen,  but  over 
a hundred  hypotheses!  Unfortunately,  very  few  of 
these  theoreticians  bothered  to  go  to  the  spot  and  see 
for  themselves.  Everybody  got  into  the  act.  Meteors, 
comets,  asteroids — it  seems  every  phenomenon  known 
to  man  has  been  twisted  in  one  way  or  another  to  try 
and  fit  the  facts.  But  everything  failed.  Modern  sci- 
ence still  provides  no  satisfactory  explanation.” 

I had  to  agree  with  Zolotov’s  comment.  None  of  the 
English-language  books  I had  read  on  the  matter  pro- 
vided a logical,  rational  solution  to  the  mystery.21  The 
best  explanation  in  favor  among  scientists  is  the  com- 
etary impact  hypothesis,  but  it  remains  unproven. 

NO  TRACE  OF  IMPACT 

“The  crux  of  the  whole  problem,  the  real  secret,  is 
that  the  explosion  took  place  at  an  altitude  of  three 
miles  ...” 

“How  do  you  know  that?”  Martine  broke  in.  “I 
mean,  if  there  is  no  trace  of  impact  . . .” 

“Precisely.  Don’t  forget  that  the  uprooted  trees, 
thousands  of  them,  provide  a perfect  map  of  the  ca- 
tastrophe. They  all  pointed  away  from  a central  site. 
Yet  at  the  epicenter  itself  nothing  had  been  destroyed. 
The  force  of  the  explosion  blew  downward  from  the 
object,  along  a cone,  not  horizontally  at  all  as  it  would 
have  in  a collision.” 

Taking  a piece  of  paper,  Zolotov  began  drawing  a 
rough  sketch  for  us.  “If  a foreign  body  had  actually 
hit  the  earth  at  a speed  of  about  three  miles  per  sec- 


66 


TUNCUSKA:  THE  CONTINUING  ENIGMA 


ond,  over  10,000  miles  per  hour,  there  would  have 
been  a sudden  heating  of  the  soil  which  could  have 
risen  to  thousands  of  degrees  and  a crater  of  up  to 
sixty  miles  would  have  been  formed.  You  have  a per- 
fect example  of  that  with  Meteor  Crater  in  Arizona. 
But  where  is  the  Tunguska  crater?  It  does  not  exist. 
Nothing  actually  hit  the  ground  there.” 

Flipping  the  pages  of  his  book  to  a map  of  the  dev- 
astated area,  he  went  on.  “As  you  can  see  from  the 
pattern  of  the  fallen  trees,  the  force  of  the  explosion 
does  not  decrease  equally  in  all  directions  away  from 
the  epicenter.  The  destruction  created  a heart-shaped 
wave  with  two  clearly  separated  lobes.” 

“Was  anything  actually  found  at  the  site?”  I in- 
quired. 

“Nothing,  and  that’s  the  real  paradox.  If  it  had  been 
a meteorite,  the  mass  at  the  time  of  impact  would 
have  had  to  be  in  the  range  of  a thousand  tons,  still 
assuming  a speed  of  three  miles  per  second.  There 
would  obviously  be  a crater.  Many  fragments  of  the 
object  would  be  in  all  the  world’s  greatest  museums. 
Instead  we  found  nothing  at  all.” 

“Is  there  any  way  to  establish  the  exact  speed?” 

“We  only  have  an  approximation.  The  velocity 
must  be  in  the  range  of  three  to  eighteen  miles  per 
second.  The  object  arrived  from  the  southwest,  trav- 
eling in  a northeasterly  direction.  Clearly  speed  is  the 
key  question.  What  we  observe  is  destruction  caused 
by  the  conversion  of  kinetic  energy,  which  is  mea- 
sured by  mass  multiplied  by  the  square  of  the  speed, 
into  light  and  thermal  energy.” 

“It  must  be  possible  to  estimate  that  total  energy 
from  the  pattern  of  destruction,”  I said. 

“Oh,  yes,  we  have  done  that,”  said  Zolotov,  quickly 


67 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


paging  through  his  book  to  show  us  the  formulas  he 
had  developed. 

“The  total  energy,  measured  in  ergs,  was  the  num- 
ber 10  followed  by  twenty-four  zeroes,  which  is 
equivalent  to  a forty-megaton  nuclear  blast.” 


THE  TUNGUSKA  INVESTIGATIONS 

A witness  named  S.  B.  Semenov,  a farmer  living  forty 
miles  away  from  the  site  of  the  Siberian  explosion, 
described  the  effects  in  the  following  way: 

I was  sitting  on  my  porch  facing  north  when  sud- 
denly, to  the  northwest,  there  appeared  a great  flash 
of  light.  There  was  so  much  heat  that  ...  my  shirt 
was  almost  burned  off  my  back.  I saw  a huge  fireball 
that  covered  an  enormous  part  of  the  sky.  . . . After- 
ward it  became  dark  and  at  the  same  time  I felt  an 
explosion  that  threw  me  several  feet  from  the  porch. 

I lost  consciousness. 

Another  witness  said  that  after  the  fire  that  de- 
stroyed the  forest,  local  people  who  went  out  in  search 
of  a reindeer  herd  found  only  charred  carcasses. 

Yet  the  cataclysm  aroused  no  scientific  curiosity  for 
thirteen  years.  True,  everyone  had  assumed  that  the 
object  was  a large  meteorite,  which  was  not  exciting 
enough  for  an  expedition  to  be  mounted.  The  region 
itself  was  reputed  to  be  almost  inaccessible.  It  is  an 
area  of  rolling  taiga,  huge  swamps,  and  primeval  for- 
est. The  mosquitoes  are  ferocious  and  the  winters  are 
so  severe  that  birds  have  been  known  to  drop  frozen 
from  the  air. 


68 


TUNCUSKA:  THE  CONTINUING  ENIGMA 


It  was  only  in  March  1927  that  mineralogist  Leonid 
Kulik  and  an  assistant  set  out  from  Tayshet  with  sup- 
plies and  equipment  to  locate  the  site  of  what  they 
assumed  was  a large  impact  crater.  Maps  were  inac- 
curate and  the  high  latitude  confused  the  compass, 
but  Kulik  eventually  reached  Vanovara,  where  he  was 
able  to  question  eyewitnesses.  In  mid-April,  suffering 
from  scurvy  and  other  diseases,  the  two  scientists  saw 
the  astonishing  effects  of  the  devastation.  But  when 
they  finally  reached  what  must  have  been  the  epicen- 
ter, they  found  themselves  in  a standing  forest.  There 
was  no  sign  of  a meteorite. 

Kulik’s  sensational  report  to  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences triggered  a second  expedition  in  April  1928, 
during  which  Kulik  and  others  conducted  a magnetic 
survey,  still  hoping  to  find  fragments  of  an  object. 

The  following  year  a better-equipped  expedition 
camped  at  the  site  for  eighteen  months,  obstinately 
digging  in  every  depression  in  the  expectation  that 
sooner  or  later  they  would  unearth  the  huge  meteorite 
that  must  lie  there. 

It  was  in  the  early  1930s  that  the  comet  hypothesis 
was  first  proposed.  It  was  independently  suggested  by 
F.  ].  W.  Whipple  of  Kew  Observatory  in  London  and 
by  I.  S.  Astapovich  of  the  Soviet  Union.  A gaseous 
comet  would  have  left  no  trace  of  its  impact  after  its 
nucleus  exploded  in  the  atmosphere  with  a kinetic  en- 
ergy level  of  1021  ergs  per  second.  “It  was  this  explo- 
sion that  gave  rise  to  the  seismic  and  air  waves,”  said 
Astapovich,  “while  the  high-temperature  explosive 
wave  caused  the  uniform  scorching.” 

The  problem  with  this  theory  is  that  more  recent 
estimates  of  the  energy  released  place  it  at  1023  ergs 


69 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


per  second,  a hundred  times  greater  than  proposed  by 
the  two  astronomers.  Zolotov’s  figure,  as  we  saw,  is 
actually  still  ten  times  higher. 

As  unsatisfactory  as  it  may  be,  the  comet  theory 
still  represents  the  most  common  explanation  given  in 
science  books  today.  But  Zolotov  disagrees  with  it. 

Zolotov  himself  led  expeditions  to  Siberia  in  1959 
and  in  1960.  He  noted  an  alterance  of  burned  and 
unburned  zones  that  Professor  Felix  Zigel  of  the  Mos- 
cow Aviation  Institute  interpreted  as  evidence  of  lu- 
minous radiation,  some  areas  being  shaded  from  direct 
exposure  to  the  light. 

Further  evidence  of  radiation  damage  was  pro- 
vided by  the  observed  diseases  of  the  reindeer  and  by 
genetic  changes  in  the  plants  in  the  area  of  the  im- 
pact, with  a significant  increase  in  cell  production. 
Radioactive  cesium  137  was  found  in  abnormal  quan- 
tities in  the  1908  tree  rings. 

Soviet  authorities  and  U.S.  experts  such  as  physicist 
Willard  F.  Libby  estimated  the  energy  yield  at  thirty 
megatons,  1,500  times  greater  than  the  Hiroshima 
atomic  bomb  blast.  At  Hiroshima  wood  was  ignited 
only  to  a distance  of  one  mile  and  the  range  of  the 
destruction  was  a mere  eighteen  square  miles,  Alexis 
Zolotov  reminded  us,  putting  into  perspective  the 
enormous  destruction  he  had  witnessed  in  the  taiga. 

THE  COMET  THEORY 

“So  it  could  not  have  been  a meteorite,”  said  Martine. 
“This  brings  us  back  to  the  possibility  that  the  object 
was  a comet,  as  Carl  Sagan  and  others  have  argued.” 

Personally,  I must  confess  that  I have  always  found 
the  comet  theory  hard  to  follow.  There  were  numer- 


70 


TUNCUSKA:  THE  CONTINUING  ENIGMA 


ous  professional  and  amateur  astronomers  scanning 
the  sky  for  such  objects  every  night  at  the  turn  of  the 
century.  Comets  that  come  close  to  the  earth  are  easy 
to  spot  and  to  track.  They  develop  tails  that  are  illu- 
minated by  the  sun,  and  their  trajectories  can  be  plot- 
ted with  precision.  So  how  could  a cometary  body  hit 
our  planet  without  warning?  It  might  have  come  di- 
rectly from  the  direction  of  the  sun,  of  course,  so  that 
it  would  be  masked  by  daylight.  In  recent  years,  there 
has  been  increased  awareness  that  such  cometary  nu- 
clei might  go  undetected  and  hit  the  earth  in  large 
numbers,  but  the  theory  is  controversial.  Further- 
more, Zolotov  argues  that  both  the  mass  and  the  ve- 
locity would  be  too  small  to  explain  the  devastation 
recorded  in  Siberia.  Shouldn’t  we  find  many  traces  of 
such  objects,  just  as  we  find  evidence  of  meteorites? 
And  what  caused  the  explosion  itself,  if  the  object  did 
not  hit  the  ground? 

“We  don’t  see  how  the  speed  of  the  comet  at  the 
time  of  impact  could  have  exceeded  a few  miles  per 
second,  and  that  is  insufficient  to  provide  the  energy 
figures.  Remember  that  meteorites  crash  at  speeds  of 
up  to  twenty-five  miles  per  second.  Furthermore,  the 
comet  would  have  left  tell-tale  traces,  metals,  miner- 
als, even  if  it  was  primarily  composed  of  ice,  which 
would  have  melted  away.  We  are  beginning  to  know 
a lot  about  the  composition  of  comets.  The  space 
probe  Vega  has  recently  approached  Halley’s  comet 
and  measured  its  density.  None  of  this  supports  the 
idea  that  the  Tunguska  explosion  was  due  to  a comet’s 
nucleus.  Sagan’s  theory  is  fine,  except  that  it  isn’t  sup- 
ported by  the  facts.” 

“Where  does  that  leave  us,  then?  What  is  your  cur- 
rent conclusion?”  I asked. 


71 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“It  was  a nuclear  blast,”  said  Zolotov.  “It  was 
caused  either  by  an  artificial  body  or  by  a phenome- 
non that  is  still  eluding  our  researchers.” 

“What  about  a black  hole?” 

“There  should  have  been  two  catastrophes  if  it  was 
a black  hole:  one  for  the  entrance  and  one  for  the  exit. 
Yet  we  have  only  one  explosion.” 

“Well,  one  catastrophe  is  enough  for  me,”  joked 
Martine  as  Zolotov  and  our  interpreters  joined  in  the 
laughter. 

“Some  Russian  writers,  notably  Alexander  Kazan- 
tsev, have  argued  that  the  explosion  could  be  due  to 
antimatter,”  I went  on.22 

“We  had  to  eliminate  this  theory,  too,”  said  Zolo- 
tov. “The  explosion  would  have  taken  place  at  a much 
higher  altitude,  as  soon  as  the  antimatter  came  into 
contact  with  the  stratosphere.” 

“How  do  you  explain  the  heart-shaped  pattern  of 
destruction  on  the  ground?” 

“There  must  have  been  interaction  between  two 
waves.  That  is  the  only  explanation  I see.  The  ballistic 
wave  was  combined  with  another  source  of  energy.  I 
tend  to  believe  the  speed  of  the  incoming  object  was 
indeed  quite  low,  only  a few  miles  per  second,  and 
the  explosion  was  not  caused  by  conversion  of  kinetic 
energy  alone,  but  also  by  release  of  internal  energy, 
like  a nuclear  bomb.” 

“What  did  the  eyewitnesses  say  about  the  object’s 
trajectory?” 

“Some  people  saw  it  move  from  west  to  east,  but  it 
seemed  to  reverse  its  course  just  before  impact.” 

“That  seems  to  suggest  a purposeful  maneuver,”  I 
pointed  out,  remembering  that  Professor  Zigel  had 
used  this  argument  in  his  lectures. 


72 


TUNCUSKA:  THE  CONTINUING  ENIGMA 


“True.  But  the  observation  of  a change  in  trajec- 
tory, by  itself,  does  not  prove  it  was  an  artificial  ob- 
ject,” concluded  Zolotov.  “Every  year  we  make  a little 
progress  in  documenting  the  phenomenon,  but  we  still 
don’t  have  any  explanation  for  it.  We  are  just  as  puz- 
zled today  as  we  were  before.” 

This  puzzlement,  apparently,  was  not  shared  by  the 
Japanese  specialists  who  traveled  to  the  site  in  1989. 
Stating  that  their  research  clearly  indicated  that  the 
catastrophe  had  been  due  to  a nuclear-powered  space- 
craft, they  erected  a monument  at  the  site,  the  first 
such  memorial  commemorating  an  alleged  UFO 
crash. 


73 


CHAPTER  7 


FOR  THE  RECORD: 
A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF 
SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


In  the  city  of  Petropavlovsk,  at  approximately  11:00 
p.m.,  with  comrades  Perekhov,  Negayev  and  Yevme- 
nenko,  I observed  two  very  strange  disks  which  moved 
one  behind  the  other  and  then  changed  formation  and 
moved  as  a pair.  Passing  almost  directly  above  us  they 
emitted  light  toward  the  ground.  When  we  fell  into  the 
zone  of  illumination  I felt  something  oppressive. 

Air  Force  Reserve  Officer  S.  N.  Popov 
March  1964 

Enough  has  been  said  and  there  are  no  grounds  for  the 
revival  of  these  absurd  rumors  that  were  buried  many 
years  ago.  Academician  Y.  A.  Artsimovich 

Quoted  in  Pravda,  January  8,  1961 


WhUe  many  UFO  buffs  are  often  selective  in  their 
references,  citing  only  the  most  recent  or  the  most  sen- 
sational research  (or  even  that  small  part  of  it  that 
happens  to  agree  with  their  own  pet  theory),  Soviet 


74 


FOR  THE  RECORD:  A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


intellectuals  are  like  most  European  scholars.  They  in- 
sist on  giving  credit  where  credit  is  due  and  they  place 
a high  degree  of  importance  on  the  accurate  history 
of  the  phenomena  they  study.  Therefore,  certain 
names  of  pioneers  recur  throughout  conversations  and 
the  samizdat  literature.  At  this  point  in  our  narrative 
it  is  useful  to  pause  and  provide  the  reader  with  a 
wider  perspective  on  UFO  research  in  the  Soviet 
Union. 

Whether  they  agree  with  them  or  not,  Soviet  ufol- 
ogists acknowledge  the  influence  of  three  great  found- 
ing fathers — namely,  the  late  Yuri  Fomin;  Professor 
Felix  Zigel,  who  died  of  a heart  attack  in  November 
1988;  and  Alexander  Kazantsev,  a popular  science  fic- 
tion writer  born  in  1906,  who  is  still  very  active  in 
the  field. 

Professor  Zigel  is  the  best  known  of  these  men  in 
the  West  because  he  served  on  the  faculty  of  the  Mos- 
cow Aviation  Institute.23  A respected  scientist,  he  was 
a cofounder  (with  Kazantsev)  of  the  short-lived  Sto- 
liarov committee  formed  in  1967  at  a time  when  the 
University  of  Colorado  was  starting  its  own  ill-fated 
study  of  UFO  phenomena'  in  the  United  States. 
Headed  up  by  nuclear  physicist  Edward  Condon,  the 
Colorado  group  was  funded  by  the  U.S.  Air  Force.  It 
quickly  degenerated  into  an  unscientific,  biased 
whitewash  and  led  to  the  closing  down  of  official  UFO 
investigation  in  the  United  States. 

Without  allowing  himself  to  be  discouraged  by  the 
lack  of  official  sanction  for  his  research,  Zigel  com- 
piled (among  other  works)  a courageous  book  in  Feb- 
ruary 1968.  Entitled  Unidentified  Flying  Objects  in 
the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics,  this  volume  of 
165  pages  was  the  first  to  make  available  the  details 


75 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


of  numerous  reports  from  the  entire  country.  What  the 
book  didn’t  say  was  that  the  road  to  the  compilation  of 
Zigel’s  study  had  been  a long  and  arduous  one. 

THE  PIONEERS 

If  we  set  aside  the  extraordinary  Tunguska  event  we 
briefly  reviewed  in  Chapter  6,  the  first  modern  UFO 
sightings  were  recorded  in  the  Soviet  Union  in  May 
1946,  over  a year  before  private  pilot  Kenneth  Arnold 
first  spoke  of  seeing  “flying  saucers.”  The  observations 
included  landings,  thus  giving  the  lie  to  a theory  that 
is  still  popular  among  amateurs  in  the  United  States, 
arguing  that  landings  are  typical  of  a “later  phase”  of 
the  phenomenon. 

According  to  the  journalists  Henry  Gris  and  Wil- 
liam Dick,  who  traveled  through  the  Soviet  Union  in 
search  of  paranormal  stories  in  1972,  Yuri  Fomin,  who 
had  studied  these  early  files,  was  convinced  that  tele- 
pathic communication  was  taking  place  between  hu- 
man witnesses  and  UFOs.  Many  close  encounter 
observers  had  “heard  a voice”  inside  their  head  that 
said  things  like  “do  not  be  afraid,  we  mean  no  harm 
to  you,”  he  reported.24 

Yuri  A.  Fomin  was  a professional  engineer,  a senior 
instructor  for  the  automation  department  of  the  Mos- 
cow Technological  Institute.  He  had  begun  in  1956  to 
collect  information  on  UFO  sightings  throughout  the 
Soviet  Union.  With  two  other  engineers,  B.  V.  Ma- 
karov and  V.  M.  Gulisov,  Fomin  issued  reports  and 
gave  public  lectures  about  the  phenomenon.  It  seemed 
that  an  open  attitude  on  the  problem  would  prevail, 
until  a venomous  article  appeared  in  the  January  8, 
1961,  issue  of  Pravda.  Entitled  “The  Truth  About  Fly- 


76 


FOR  THE  RECORD:  A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


ing  Saucers,”  it  quoted  the  skeptical  comments  by  a 
prominent  academician,  Y.  A.  Artsimovich,  who  in 
turn  cited  Harvard  astronomer  Donald  Menzel  as  the 
authority  on  the  nonexistence  of  the  problem  and 
attacked  ufologists  as  “completely  irresponsible  per- 
sons.” 

As  a result  of  this  exercise  in  character  assassina- 
tion, Yuri  Fomin’s  membership  in  the  All-Union 
Society  for  the  Propagation  of  Knowledge  was  termi- 
nated. As  Felix  Zigel  put  it,  “The  study  of  UFOs 
stopped  for  many  years  in  the  Soviet  Union.” 

Gris  and  Dick  met  Felix  Zigel  in  the  early  seventies 
at  the  home  of  Alexander  Kazantsev.  They  described 
him  as  a balding  man,  his  body  bent  forward  under 
an  invisible  weight,  with  a sad  look  in  his  eyes.  At  the 
meeting  they  discussed  the  hypothesis  that  UFOs 
might  be  visitors  from  a planet  thought  to  have  existed 
between  the  orbits  of  Mars  and  Jupiter,  where  the 
asteroid  belt  is  located.  The  Soviets  called  the  missing 
planet  Phaeton.  But  Zigel  was  very  open-minded  and 
considered  many  other  possibilities. 

Prior  to  the  late  sixties,  researchers  like  Zigel  had 
kept  a prudent  silence  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Not  only 
were  their  jobs  threatened  by  the  “rationalistic”  atti- 
tude of  the  all-powerful  (and  all-skeptical)  Academy 
of  Sciences,  but  the  central  government  was  very 
paranoid  when  it  came  to  UFO  reports. 

During  the  cold  war  the  Kremlin  regarded  such  ob- 
servations as  a psychological  warfare  ploy  master- 
minded by  the  Pentagon  and  the  Central  Intelligence 
Agency.  Soviet  officials  thought  that  such  “hysterical” 
rumors  were  deliberately  planted  to  create  unhealthy 
agitation  and  fear  among  socialist  countries,  taking 
the  workers’  attention  away  from  productive  pursuits. 


77 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


UFOS  IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION: 
HISTORICAL  DATES 


June  30,  1908 
May  1946 
1946 


Tunguska  catastrophe 
Numerous  sightings  including  landings 
Kazantsev  suggests  that  the  Tunguska  object 
was  a spaceship 


1959-1960 
January  8,  1961 


1962 


(1947-1956:  FIRST  DARK  PERIOD) 

1956  Yuri  Fomin  begins  study  of  Soviet  UFO  files 
Fomin,  Makarov,  and  Gulisov  give  lectures 
Pravda  quotes  Artsimovich  and  Menzel. 
Calls  ufologists  “irresponsible.” 

Fomin  forced  to  stop  research 
Menzel’s  book  translated  into  Russian 


(1961-1966:  SECOND  DARK  PERIOD) 


August  1966 
1966 

August  24,  1967 

October  18,  1967 
February  1968 
February  27,  1968 


International  Mathematics  Congress  in 
Moscow 

Zolotov’s  expedition  to  Tunguska 
First  pro-UFO  Kazantsev-Vallee  article  in 
Trud  sells  22  million  copies 
Stoliarov  committee  formed 
Zigel  publishes  book  on  Soviet  UFOs 
Pravda  quotes  Moustel,  Martinov, 
Lechkutsov:  “No  UFO  ever  recorded  over 
the  USSR!” 

Stoliarov  committee  disbanded 


(1968-1988:  THIRD  DARK  PERIOD) 

1970-1988  Zigel,  Azhazha  pursue  work  underground: 

some  public  lectures,  a few  articles,  but  no 
publicity 
Zigel  dies 

“Glasnost”  wave  begins 
Voronezh  sightings  attract  worldwide 
attention 


1988 
Spring  1989 
September  1989 


78 


FOR  THE  RECORD:  A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


The  only  Western  book  on  the  subject  to  be  translated 
and  published  in  the  Soviet  Union  was  Donald  Men- 
zel’s  Flying  Saucers  (1962).  Oddly  enough,  it  has  now 
come  to  light  that  the  late  Professor  Menzel  himself 
had  enjoyed  a long  association  with  the  U.S.  intelli- 
gence establishment. 

Two  researchers  who  have  done  a special  study  of 
UFOs  in  socialist  countries,  Ion  Hobana  and  Julien 
Weverbergh,  credit  me  with  helping  encourage  Felix 
Zigel  to  “go  public”  in  the  late  sixties.25  In  the  summer 
of  1966,  I attended  the  International  Mathematics 
Congress  in  Moscow.  On  that  occasion  I was  able  to 
bring  to  the  Soviet  Union  some  up-to-date  news  from 
the  West,  as  well  as  direct  information  about  the  re- 
search Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek  and  I were  pursuing,  some 
of  which  has  never  been  published  to  this  day.  Ac- 
cording to  Hobana  and  Weverbergh,  this  contact  en- 
couraged Zigel  and  a few  others  to  take  a public  stand 
on  the  issue  of  UFOs. 

When  Tass  announced  in  1967  that  a radio  astron- 
omer named  Cholomitsky  had  observed  a source  lo- 
cated in  the  constellation  Pegasus  that  seemed  to  emit 
intelligent  signals,  the  news  stimulated  the  Soviet 
ufologists  to  act.  On  October  18  of  that  year  an  offi- 
cial committee  for  the  study  of  the  phenomenon  was 
formally  organized. 

THE  STOLIAROV  COMMITTEE 

Under  the  presidency  of  Major  General  Porfiri  A.  Sto- 
liarov, with  Zigel  and  Kazantsev  as  vice-presidents 
and  engineer  Arkadi  Tikhonov  as  secretary,  the  com- 
mittee received  the  enthusiastic  support  of  four  hun- 
dred scientists,  cosmonauts,  and  engineers.  Soon  Zigel 


79 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

and  Stoliarov  were  publicly  discussing  UFOs,  empha- 
sizing facts  and  verified  sightings  over  theories  and 
fantasy. 

The  world  press  reacted  quickly  to  the  new  Soviet 
attitude.  Sensational  articles  by  Henry  Kamm26  and 
by  Walter  Sullivan  in  the  New  York  Times  stressed 
the  similarities  between  the  Condon  committee  and 
the  Stoliarov  group.  While  the  Condon  study  was  fi- 
nanced by  an  official  Air  Force  contract,  however,  the 
Stoliarov  team  was  purely  a private  volunteer  effort, 
which  was  highly  vulnerable  to  the  sanction  of  higher 
authorities.  Brandishing  the  New  York  Times,  a Rus- 
sian debunker,  the  astronomer  Y.  A.  Artsimovich, 
rushed  before  the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  de- 
manding immediate  sanctions.  Vladimir  Lechkutsov, 
the  secretary  of  the  National  Committee  of  Soviet 
Physicists,  stated  loudly  that  there  was  no  official  or- 
ganization for  the  study  of  the  UFO  phenomenon  in 
the  Soviet  Union.  That  was  a severe  blow  to  the  Sto- 
liarov committee.  On  February  27,  1968,  an  article 
published  in  the  authoritative  Pravda  proved  to  be 
the  final  assault.  Signed  by  E.  Moustel,  the  presi- 
dent of  the  astronomy  council  of  the  Academy  of 
Sciences,  and  by  D.  Martinov  and  Lechkutsov,'  the 
article  flatly  asserted  that  no  unidentified  flying  object 
had  ever  been  recorded  over  the  Soviet  Union,  an  ut- 
terly ludicrous  statement.  For  good  measure  Moustel 
and  associates  invited  Donald  Menzel  to  repeat  his  ar- 
guments for  the  Soviet  public.  The  Harvard  scientist 
obliged  in  the  January  1968  issue  of  Vokroug  Svieta. 
Soviet  ufology  went  underground  again. 

To  this  very  brief  summary  of  the  early  period  of 
UFO  research  in  the  Soviet  Union  could  be  added 
many  interesting  comments,  but  the  time  has  not  yet 


80 


FOR  THE  RECORD:  A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


come  to  make  them  public.  It  should  be  clear,  at  the 
very  least,  that  we  do  not  have  the  whole  story.  Re- 
cent revelations  about  the  close,  even  intimate  rela- 
tionship that  existed  between  Dr.  Donald  Menzel  and 
American  intelligence  agencies — a relationship  of 
which  the  Soviet  Union  must  have  been  aware — 
suggest  that  the  Academy  of  Sciences  may  have  had 
important  reasons  to  scuttle  the  naive  Stoliarov  effort. 
Certainly,  if  top  scientists  in  Moscow  already  knew 
that  the  Condon  report  was  designed  to  reach  a neg- 
ative conclusion  on  the  existence  of  the  UFO  phenom- 
enon, they  were  justified  in  avoiding  a public  relations 
debacle  by  dropping  out  of  the  game  as  early  as  they 
could.  A New  York  Times  article  by  Walter  Sullivan 
establishing  a parallel  between  the  two  committees 
may  have  scared  them,  not  because  they  didn’t  want 
to  study  UFOs,  but  because  they  already  knew  that 
the  University  of  Colorado  study  was  only  a farce  per- 
petrated on  the  American  scientific  community.  If  so, 
the  Soviets  were  either  very  smart  or  very  well  in- 
formed: indeed,  the  Colorado  study  was  destined  to 
end  in  disgrace. 

Soviet  authorities  had  another  reason  not  to  wel- 
come an  open  investigation  of  their  own  alleged  UFO 
sightings.  Contrary  to  what  the  public  was  told,  there 
were  many  confirmed  UFO  sightings  throughout  the 
Soviet  Union.  A colleague  who  traveled  to  Moscow  in 
1968  brought  word  to  me  of  the  real  reasons  for  the 
demise  of  the  Stoliarov  committee  when  he  came  to 
Paris  later  that  year.  Arkadi  Tikhonov  wanted  me  to 
know  that  the  Soviet  military  had  gathered  not  just  a 
few  but  many  thousands  of  unexplained  cases.  It  was 
the  overabundance  of  data,  not  the  lack  of  such,  that 
triggered  the  end  of  the  open  scientific  study. 


81 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 

As  Martine  and  I found  out  during  our  meetings  with 
Vladimir  Azhazha  and  with  other  researchers,  work 
had  indeed  been  pursued  in  the  USSR  in  spite  of  the 
official  denial.  Some  of  it  was  the  result  of  continuing 
private  interest.  Courageous  individuals  like  Zigel  and 
Kazantsev  were  not  easily  intimidated.  Furthermore, 
they  had  earned  high  honors  as  Soviet  citizens  (Zigel 
even  held  the  prestigious  Order  of  Lenin,  and  Kazan- 
tsev is  a much-decorated  veteran  who  was  awarded 
the  Order  of  the  Red  Star  for  his  services  as  the  head 
engineer  of  an  army  complex)  and  could  not  be  com- 
pletely silenced. 

Other  studies  proceeded  quietly,  as  we  now  recog- 
nize, under  the  auspices  of  the  military.  Some  of  them 
took  place  outside  the  Soviet  borders.  For  instance 
when  a reservist  from  the  Cuban  army  had  a close 
encounter  with  a UFO  in  June  1968,  Fidel  Castro’s 
experts  called  on  Soviet  intelligence  specialists  to  con- 
duct a very  thorough  investigation  of  the  whole  affair. 
(Perhaps  they  had  forgotten  to  read  the  academicians’ 
explanation  of  UFO  phenomena  in  Pravda  the  previ- 
ous February?) 

The  case  deserves  to  be  quoted  in  detail  because  it 
illustrates  the  richness  of  the  Soviet  UFO  files  and  the 
fact  that  these  files  are  obviously  not  limited  to  the 
Soviet  Union  itself,  just  as  American  files  actually 
cover  the  whole  world. 

The  individual  involved  in  the  encounter,  Isidro 
Puentes  Ventura,  was  forty-two  years  old  and  lived 
close  to  the  village  of  Cabanas.  His  file  in  the  army 
reserve  described  him  as  a serious  man  who  was  re- 
sponsible and  could  be  trusted.  On  June  14,  1968,  he 


82 


FOR  THE  RECORD:  A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


was  ordered  to  stand  guard  in  an  area  of  the  country- 
side he  knew  well.  His  duties  began  at  6:30  p.m.  and 
ended  at  2:45  a.m.,  when  he  was  supposed  to  turn  in 
his  weapon  and  sign  the  roster. 

Five  minutes  past  midnight  several  machine-gun 
rounds  were  heard,  coming  from  Puentes’s  location. 
Several  patrols  went  out  to  look  for  him.  They  found 
him  at  dawn,  unconscious.  He  was  transported  to  the 
provincial  hospital  in  Pinar  del  Rio  where  he  re- 
mained in  shock,  unable  to  speak  for  six  days.  He  was 
moved  to  the  neurological  ward  at  the  Naval  Hospital 
of  Havana,  where  the  leading  experts  who  studied  him 
found  no  brain  damage  and  diagnosed  strong  emo- 
tional trauma.  He  remained  in  shock  another  seven 
days. 

In  the  meantime,  Cuban  intelligence  had  taken  over 
the  site  and  contacted  the  Soviets.  Investigators  found 
forty-eight  spent  machine-gun  casings  and  fourteen 
bullets  flattened  by  impact  against  some  extremely 
hard  metallic  object.  A depression  was  visible  in  the 
soil,  with  a central  hole  three  feet  in  diameter  and 
three  smaller  indentations  around  it.  They  indicated 
the  presence  of  a very  heavy  device.  Furthermore, 
Cuban  radar  in  the  area  had  detected  an  unidentified 
object  that  vanished  amidst  a tremendous  amount  of 
electronic  noise. 

Within  a fifteen-foot  radius  the  soil  at  the  site  was 
calcined  and  covered  with  ashlike  gray  dust,  which 
was  duly  analyzed  without  producing  any  unusual  re- 
sults: it  only  confirmed  that  a high  degree  of  heat  had 
been  applied  to  the  soil. 

Soviet  experts  quickly  deployed  a veritable  arsenal 
of  measuring  instruments  and  took  many  samples. 

Thirteen  days  after  the  incident  Puentes  began 


83 


Fig.  6.  Diagram  of  traces  left  by  a UFO  observed  by  Cuban 
army  reservist  Isidro  Puentes  Ventura.  The  incident  was  in- 
vestigated by  Soviet  military  experts. 


awakening  from  the  coma.  He  told  doctors  and  mili- 
tary officials  that  he  had  first  seen  a white  light  behind 
some  trees.  He  went  to  investigate  and  found  himself 
150  feet  away  from  an  object  that  was  resting  on  the 
ground.  He  observed  it  for  ten  minutes.  It  was  round, 
with  a dome  and  a series  of  “antennas”  on  top.  In 
spite  of  the  strange  shape  and  unusual  brilliance  of 
the  object,  Puentes  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
craft  must  be  an  American  helicopter  (what  else  could 
it  be?)  and  started  firing  at  it,  as  he  had  been  in- 
structed and  trained  to  do.  He  had  fired  about  forty 
j rounds  when  the  craft  became  orange  and  emitted  a 
' strong  whistling  sound.  That  sound  was  his  last  con- 
scious memory. 

When  they  heard  this  story,  Soviet  intelligence 


84 


FOR  THE  RECORD:  A BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  SOVIET  UFOLOGY 


experts  escalated  the  study  of  the  case.  Puentes  was 
subjected  to  intense  interrogation  for  fifty  hours,  then 
sent  to  a group  of  psychiatrists  for  further  testing. 
These  examinations  simply  confirmed  that  Isidro 
Puentes  was  a normal,  reliable,  uneducated  Cuban 
peasant.  There  was  no  contradiction  in  his  story,  no 
matter  how  often  he  was  questioned  about  it. 

Next,  the  witness  was  put  through  fifteen  hypnosis 
sessions,  during  which  he  told  the  same  exact  story 
everybody  had  already  heard.  And  the  fourteen  flat- 
tened bullets  whose  trajectory  had  been  dramatically 
interrupted  by  some  very  hard  and  smooth  object  were 
further  evidence  of  his  veracity. 

In  spite  of  such  cases,  the  director  of  Pulkovo  Ob- 
servatory, Vladimir  Alexeyevich  Krat,  stated  in  July 
1978  that  the  UFO  problem  boiled  down  to  two  parts: 
first,  natural  phenomena  that  were  poorly  studied; 
second,  classical  objects  in  space  such  as  artificial  sat- 
ellites. Krat  bitterly  criticized  Azhazha  and  Professor 
Veynik  of  the  Bielorussian  Academy  of  Sciences  for 
lecturing  on  the  subject,  and  he  went  on  to  declare 
that  “there  is  no  real  evidence  to  show  that  there  is 
life,  including  intelligent  life,  anywhere  but  on  planet 
earth.”27 

In  January  1979,  the  pressure  from  the  sheer  num- 
ber of  UFO  sightings  became  such  that  scientific  au- 
thorities felt  obligated  to  act.  Two  distinguished 
scientists,  Vladimir  Migulin  and  Platov,  published  an 
important  article  in  the  magazine  Nedelya  in  response 
to  a man  from  Kuybychev  (on  the  Volga,  some  500 
miles  east-southeast  of  Moscow)  who  had  reported  a 
UFO.28  Noting  that  the  Academy  of  Sciences  was  re- 
ceiving numerous  such  reports,  they  enumerated  all 
the  natural  phenomena  that  could  explain  them. 


85 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


However,  they  also  conceded  that  some  reported 
sightings  did  remain  unidentified  and  were  worthy  of 
calm  and  sober  scientific  research.  They  concluded 
their  paper  with  some  technical  advice  to  the  readers 
of  the  review  on  proper  ways  to  report  future  sight- 
ings, asking  that  they  be  forwarded  to  the  Academy 
of  Sciences. 

During  our  visit  to  Moscow  we  were  able  to  meet 
with  Professor  Migulin  (see  Chapter  14).  He  told  us 
frankly  that  he  remained  very  skeptical  about  the  re- 
ality of  the  reported  sightings. 

In  spite  of  the  new  willingness  of  scientific  author- 
ities to  consider  the  sightings  and  to  analyze  them,  the 
road  to  full  scientific  acceptance  of  the  phenomenon 
is  going  to  be  a long  and  arduous  one.  And  the  burden 
is  on  us  to  convince  our  colleagues,  to  educate  them 
about  the  seriousness  of  the  UFO  experience,  and  to 
go  on  with  our  own  research  into  the  unknown. 


86 


CHAPTER  8 


BIOLOCATION: 

CAN  UFO  ANOMALIES  BE 
DETECTED  BY  HUMANS? 


Every  living  entity  generates  a biological  field.  It  is 
probably  an  attribute  of  the  organic  realm.  Perhaps  it 
is  when  it  learned  to  generate  this  field  that  nature  be- 
came alive.  Professor  Alexis  Zolotov 

Moscow,  January  1990 


R/lany  incidents  of  our  trip  to  the  Soviet  Union  were 
so  powerful  that  they  have  remained  fixed  in  my 
memory.  Among  them  was  the  experience  of  watch- 
ing Professor  Alexis  Zolotov  walking  up  and  down  the 
length  of  the  carpeted  office  of  the  vice-chairman  of 
Novosti  holding  a strange  metallic  contraption  ahead 
of  him.  His  bright  eyes  and  long,  wiry  gray  beard 
completed  the  illusion  of  some  age-old,  esoteric  cere- 
mony as  the  metal  wire  in  his  hand  twisted  repeatedly 
to  the  left  and  to  the  right,  as  if  moved  by  a definite 
but  invisible  force  of  nature. 


87 


Fig.  7.  Shape  of  the  dowsing  device  used  by  Alexis  Zolotov  in 
biolocation  tests. 


“The  desk  should  not  be  here,”  announced  the  sci- 
entist. “This  is  a negative  section  of  the  room.  You 
can  verify  this  yourselves.” 

Martine  got  up  and  took  hold  of  the  device  as  in- 
structed. She  walked  along  the  wall  and  felt  the  wire 
twist  in  her  hand.  I did  the  same  with  obvious  results. 
But  this  was  hardly  a scientific  experiment.  Perhaps 
we  had  been  unconsciously  influenced  by  watching 
Zolotov’s  earlier  performance.  In  any  case,  the  time 
had  clearly  come  to  learn  more  about  a phenomenon 
all  Soviet  ufologists  seemed  to  take  for  granted,  the 
effect  of  biolocation,  which  had  created  such  confu- 
sion in  the  West  when  Tass  had  first  revealed  its  use 
in  Voronezh. 


BIOLOGICAL  FIELDS 

“It  is  impossible  to  deny  the  existence  of  certain  fields 
around  living  beings,”  said  Alexis  Zolotov  as  we  sipped 
our  morning  tea,  which  had  already  become  a cher- 
ished tradition. 

“The  word  field  is  pretty  vague  in  this  context,”  I 
pointed  out.  “It’s  all  a question  of  definition.” 

“Of  course,”  answered  Zolotov.  “And  some  people 


88 


BIOLOCATION:  CAN  UFO  ANOMALIES  BE  DETECTED  BY  HUMANS? 


use  terms  like  aura,  which  are  even  more  vague.  We 
currently  have  two  schools  of  thought  in  Russia  on  this 
point.  Some  people  argue  that  we  are  dealing  with 
the  fusion  of  known  phenomena  like  the  electric  field, 
the  magnetic  field,  and  so  on,  which  change  in  quality 
when  they  are  mixed  together.  The  second  group  be- 
lieves that  the  aura  actually  corresponds  to  an  inde- 
pendent physical  field,  not  yet  recognized,  but 
endowed  with  its  own  characteristics.  I must  tell  you 
that  I lean  toward  the  latter  view.” 

While  the  people  around  the  table  lit  their  ciga- 
rettes and  prepared  to  take  notes,  Zolotov  made  an 
additional  comment.  “Every  living  entity  generates  a 
biological  field.  It  is  probably  an  attribute  of  the  or- 
ganic realm.  Perhaps  it  is  when  it  learned  to  generate 
this  field  that  nature  became  alive.” 

“So  how  would  you  characterize  this  new  field?”  I 
was  eager  to  hear  his  answer. 

Zolotov  proved  to  be  a patient  teacher.  “Let’s  talk 
about  two  of  its  major  characteristics,”  he  said.  “I  call 
them  superimposition  and  induction.  It  is  the  super- 
imposition or,  more  simply,  the  fusion  of  all  these 
fields  that  constitutes  the  global  field  of  the  earth.  But 
because  of  its  unequal  distribution  over  the  planet  the 
biological  field  presents  certain  anomalies.” 

“In  the  West  one  often  hears  claims  about  specific 
spots,”  I said.  “Megalithic  sites  are  supposed  to  be  an  ex- 
ample of  such  anomalies.  Do  you  subscribe  to  this  idea?” 

“Yes.  Such  sites  include  natural  features  over  which 
churches  and  temples  were  erected  down  through  the 
centuries.  We  have  a major  anomalous  zone  in  the 
Perm  region.” 

“Is  the  anomaly  generally  of  an  energetic  nature? 
Energy  and  information  are  two  sides  of  the  same 


89 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


coin.  So  why  couldn’t  these  effects  be  informational 
in  nature?  We  may  be  missing  a large  part  of  the  phe- 
nomenon.” 

Zolotov  smiled.  His  answer  indicated  that  he  had 
thought  long  and  hard  about  the  same  problem.  “You 
will  grant  to  me  that  for  energy  to  be  equated  with 
information  it  must  have  a carrier,  a vector.  The 
problem  is  that  we  have  not  yet  identified  all  the  car- 
riers. There  are  probably  more  than  five  levels,  per- 
haps seven  or  nine.  Level  one  is  cinetic  motion,  which 
became  understood  in  the  eighteenth  century.  Level 
two  is  the  electromagnetic  field,  which  we  mastered 
early  in  the  present  century.  Now  we  are  on  the 
threshold  of  the  third  level,  the  biological  field.” 

The  obvious  thought  flashed  through  my  mind.  If 
there  were  extraterrestrial  beings,  or  if  nonhuman 
forms  of  consciousness  were  interacting  with  us,  they 
probably  would  not  use  the  primitive  methods  that 
projects  like  SETI  (Search  for  Extraterrestrial  Intelli- 
gence) have  always  assumed  they  would  use.  Why 
bother  sending  us  radio  signals  that  are  physically 
crippled  by  unacceptable  propagation  limitations 
when  we  may  be  on  the  threshold  of  understanding 
much  more  significant,  effective,  immediate  forms  of 
information  exchange? 

Zolotov  went  on,  now  speaking  with  a passion  that 
betrayed  his  long  interest  in  the  subject.  “The  fourth 
level,  in  my  opinion,  will  turn  out  to  be  the  infor- 
mational field  you  are  talking  about.  We  don’t  know 
much  about  the  fifth  and  higher  levels.  They  may  have 
to  do  with  the  cosmic  realm.” 

“Why  would  such  biological  field  anomalies  play  a 
role  in  the  manifestations  of  the  UFO  phenomenon?” 
I asked. 


90 


BIOLOCATION:  CAN  UFO  ANOMALIES  BE  DETECTED  BY  HUMANS? 


“We  do  not  know  why,  but  that  certainly  seems  to 
be  the  case  in  the  Perm  region.  The  problem  is  that 
we  don’t  know  if  the  anomalies  are  stable  or  not.  We 
do  think  some  positive  anomalies  are  stable,  at  sites 
where  ancient  temples  have  been  erected,  for  exam- 
ple. Even  when  the  temple  itself  has  since  been  de- 
stroyed. But  the  density  of  biological  fields  does 
change.” 


INDUCTION 

“The  primary  field  impacts  the  whole  earth,  but  the 
organic  realm  is  influenced  by  the  biological  field. 
These  two  quantities  add  their  effects  together.” 

“Would  you  expect  crystals  to  manifest  these  effects 
in  special  ways?”  Martine  asked. 

“Crystals  are  known  to  have  particular  properties 
with  respect  to  electromagnetism,  and  they  probably 
have  similar  advantages  for  the  biological  domain. 
One  example  comes  to  mind,  that  of  a sensitive  named 
Vanga  who  lives  in  Bulgaria.  He  is  blind,  but  he  seems 
to  have  a special  ability  to  diagnose  illnesses.  He  makes 
his  patients  simply  hold  a cube  of  sugar  during  the 
process  because  he  says  the  sugar  crystals  confirm  his 
readings.  A minute  ago  you  brought  up  the  informa- 
tion field.  It  is  possible  that  sensitive  subjects  simply 
read  out  this  field.  But  do  you  realize  that  ten  years 
ago  we  could  not  have  had  this  conversation?  People 
would  have  said  we  were  dealing  with  mystical  non- 
sense!” 

“What  happens  if  you  actually  create  an  artificial 
anomaly,  for  example,  by  damming  a river,  by  alter- 
ing the  landscape?” 

“If  you  introduce  a new  biological  field,”  Zolotov 


91 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


said,  “new  lines  of  force  will  be  created,  and  they  can 
be  detected  by  people  trained  in  biolocation.  The  sign 
will  be  positive  in  certain  parts  of  the  area  and  neg- 
ative in  others.  Furthermore,  there  will  be  important 
transition  zones  in  between.” 

“What  do  they  mean?  Assuming  that  you  can  reli- 
ably trace  these  lines  of  force,  as  you  claim,  how  do 
you  know  what  conclusions  to  draw  from  their  exis- 
tence?” 

The  answer  seemed  obvious  to  Zolotov.  “The  zones 
of  negative  force  usually  are  experienced  as  discom- 
fort, and  the  positive  ones  induce  euphoria.  Histori- 
cally, religious  authorities  had  placed  their  centers  of 
worship  on  positive  zones.  But  the  transition  regions 
are  the  most  nefarious.  To  give  you  a simple  example, 
in  some  houses  we  find  that  the  bed  is  at  the  wrong 
place.  This  can  cause  illnesses,  arguments  between 
husband  and  wife.  We  try  to  remove  negative  fields 
from  certain  rooms  or  certain  buildings.  I have  dem- 
onstrated to  you  what  happened  in  this  office  where 
we  are  now,”  he  added,  motioning  toward  the  desk 
and  drawing  invisible  lines  of  separation  through  the 
room.  “But  some  of  the  most  important  applications 
are  to  enclosed  spaces  where  people  have  to  work  to- 
gether, such  as  submarines  and  space  stations.” 

“The  use  of  the  word  field  implies  more  than  simple 
detection,”  I argued.  “It  suggests  the  ability  to  focus, 
to  concentrate,  to  broadcast,  and  to  modify.  Have  you 
explored  these  possibilities  in  the  laboratory?” 

“Yes,  and  we  know  the  field  can  be  concentrated. 
We  can  take  a watch,  for  example,  and  act  on  its 
internal  mechanism.” 

“Even  a digital  watch?” 


92 


BIOLOCATION:  CAN  UFO  ANOMALIES  BE  DETECTED  BY  HUMANS? 


“Yes.  One  can  affect  the  quartz  crystal  inside  the 
watch,  of  course.” 

“I  suppose  this  applies  to  the  human  body  as  well?” 
asked  Martine. 

“There  have  always  been  healers  who  treated  dis- 
eases by  such  means,  in  Russia  and  elsewhere,  but 
that  is  not  a simple  situation.  The  healers  often  make 
predictions;  they  claim  to  see  the  future.  If  that  is 
true,  they  must  be  accessing  the  informational  field  as 
well.” 

This  last  remark  launched  us  into  a discussion  of 
the  nature  of  time.  In  modern  physics  it  is  generally 
argued  that  time  is  a dimension  similar  to  the  three 
dimensions  of  space,  and  common  logic  is  based  on 
the  assumption  that  effects  always  derive  from  causes. 
I confessed  to  Zolotov  that  I had  drifted  away  from 
theoretical  physics  when  I began  doubting  that  it 
could  account  for  psychic  reality.  If  time  is  a dimen- 
sion like  any  other,  why  can  we  only  move  in  one 
direction  along  the  time  axis?  Such  topics  were  never 
discussed.  The  very  concept  is  too  narrow,  especially 
if  one  takes  into  account  paranormal  experiments 
where  sensitive  subjects  have  reliably  acquired  infor- 
mation about  the  future. 

“Such  experiments  have  been  done  so  successfully 
that  they  can  no  longer  be  ignored,”  I emphasized. 

Zolotov  responded  with  the  indulgence  of  a cardi- 
nal confronted  by  a young  priest  who  had  just  posed 
a nagging  question  to  him  about  the  nature  of  the 
angels.  Again,  it  was  clear  that  he  represented  a group 
of  scientists  who  had  pondered  these  problems  and 
had  recognized  the  obvious  fact  that  modern  physics 
will  face  major  changes  if  information  can  be  re- 


93 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


trieved  from  the  future,  or  if  it  has  failed  to  take  into 
account  biological  fields  that  are  everywhere  around 
us.  Zolotov  also  gave  me  to  understand  that  this  was 
neither  the  time  nor  the  place  to  go  deeper  into  such 
a vast  problem. 

“Have  you  read  the  works  of  Hegel?”  he  asked.  “He 
tried  to  explain  the  paranormal  phenomena  of  his 
time,  such  as  mesmerism  and  clairvoyance.  But  he 
could  not  account  for  precognition.  We  continue  this 
research  ...  we  have  many  subjects  who  can  do  these 
things.” 


PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS 

We  continued  to  seek  answers.  “If  I understand  you 
correctly,  you  have  not  only  studied  these  various 
fields,  but  you  are  actually  using  this  knowledge  in 
practical  applications.  Can  you  describe  them?” 

“Everything  we  do  has  practical  applications,”  Zo- 
lotov said.  “Our  institute  in  Kalinin  is  concerned  with 
mineral  exploration.  Our  students  are  geologists,  and 
they  graduate  with  a diploma  in  biolocation.” 

“You  mean  ...  an  official  diploma?”  asked  Mar- 
tine  with  a note  of  astonishment  in  her  voice. 

“Yes,  yes.  Everything  in  the  USSR  is  official,  you 
know,”  remarked  Zolotov,  his  eyes  sparkling  with  hu- 
mor. “We  are  part  of  the  Department  of  Geology, 
what  you  would  call  the  Department  of  the  Interior, 
and  we  have  a state  budget.” 

“If  you  take  a group  of  average  geologists,  how 
many  of  them  have  the  ability  to  learn  biolocation?” 
Martine  inquired. 

“Most  people  have,  in  varying  degrees.  The  vast 
majority  can  be  trained.  Our  students  are  not  para- 


94 


BIOLOCATION:  CAN  UFO  ANOMALIES  BE  DETECTED  BY  HUMANS? 


psychologists,  mind  you.  They  use  what  we  teach 
them  to  go  into  the  field  and  find  mineral  deposits. 
You  should  come  and  visit  us.  Kalinin  is  only  two 
hours  away  by  train.” 

“So  how  do  you  apply  these  techniques  to  the  study 
of  UFOs?”  I asked. 

“And  how  did  you  personally  become  involved  in 
this?”  added  Martine. 

“When  I was  researching  the  Tunguska  catastrophe 
I witnessed  UFOs  three  times,”  answered  Zolotov. 
“They  looked  like  orange-colored  globes.  They  were 
silent,  with  an  arc  of  light  around  them.  In  1976  I 
saw  a luminous  cylinder  in  the  sky.” 

“Can  you  give  us  examples  of  close  encounters  from 
your  files?” 

“Let  me  tell  you  about  two  specific  landing  cases 
where  I have  visited  the  actual  sites.  The  first  one  was 
at  Octobriski,  in  the  Bakhiri  Republic.  That  was  in 
April  1967.  We  found  a large  hole  in  the  ground.  It 
measured  nineteen  feet  in  diameter,  and  it  was  per- 
fectly round.  We  computed  that  twenty  tons  of  dirt 
had  been  removed  by  an  unknown  phenomenon.” 

“Were  there  any  witnesses?” 

“Yes,  they  told  us  they  had  seen  a large  cloud,  and 
when  it  dissipated  they  found  this  hole.  We  elimi- 
nated both  the  lightning  bolt  theory  and  the  meteorite 
hypothesis.” 

Zolotov  paused  to  give  us  time  to  take  notes,  then 
he  went  on.  “Ten  years  later,  in  August  1977,  in  Che- 
khov, near  Serpukhov,  three  friends  were  gathering 
mushrooms  when  all  of  a sudden  they  noticed  some- 
thing like  a bright  sphere  or  balloon.  But  it  wasn’t  just 
a balloon,  because  at  the  site  was  a depression  four- 
teen feet  in  diameter.  It  was  not  deep,  only  two 


95 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


inches,  but  the  depression  was  equivalent  to  a resting 
mass  of  2,000  tons.  The  dirt  was  sterile  at  the  spot, 
with  a significant  drop  in  the  number  of  microorgan- 
isms.” 

Taking  a map  where  we  had  circled  the  town  of 
Chekhov,  Zolotov  tapped  it  with  his  finger  for  em- 
phasis. “This  is  the  first  case  where  biolocation  was 
used  by  our  investigators.  Our  greatest  specialists  went 
there.  When  I visited  the  site,  it  must  have  been  a 
year  later,  the  dowsing  instrument  was  still  spinning 
very  hard.” 

I had  to  clarify  the  implications  of  such  a phenom- 
enon. “Does  that  indicate  anything  in  particular  to 
you?” 

“The  strength  of  the  fixed  field,”  answered  Zolotov. 

“Is  that  true  for  every  subject?”  I asked  in  some 
surprise. 

“Of  course.  When  several  specialists  investigate  the 
sites,  they  generally  observe  the  same  manifestations.” 

That  was  one  of  the  points  that  gave  me  the  most 
trouble.  While  there  is  a long  tradition  of  dowsing  in 
the  West,  supported  by  preliminary  but  tantalizing 
laboratory  research,  various  investigators  generally 
experience  the  phenomenon  in  different  ways,  not  in 
the  neat  and  reliable  fashion  the  Soviet  researchers 
seemed  to  be  describing. 

“So  please  explain  to  me  how  that  relates  to  the 
presence  of  a UFO,”  I said  to  Zolotov. 

“Well,  in  both  cases  we  had  to  conclude  that  the 
phenomenon  had  affected  the  biological  field  very 
deeply.  The  signals  we  record  at  such  places  are  un- 
like those  that  occur  naturally.  They  fall  into  a char- 
acteristic pattern  we  have  learned  to  recognize.” 


96 


BIOLOCATION:  CAN  UFO  ANOMALIES  BE  DETECTED  BY  HUMANS? 


PERSONAL  OBSERVATIONS 

It  was  left  for  Martine  to  pose  the  question  that  would 
reveal  for  us  how  closely  the  UFO  phenomenon  in  the 
Soviet  Union  had  followed  the  same  patterns  observed 
in  the  West.  “Other  than  those  globes  of  light  in  Si- 
beria,” she  asked,  “have  you  had  any  direct  experi- 
ence?” 

Alexis  Zolotov  just  smiled  and  answered  her,  a 
touch  of  self-consciousness  sneaking  for  the  first  time 
into  his  voice.  “I  saw  a humanoid  when  I was  seven, 
in  1933.  This  happened  in  the  house  where  I was  born. 
He  appeared  very  suddenly  in  the  room  where  I was 
standing.  This  being  had  a high  cranium,  no  mask  or 
breathing  apparatus.  He  was  as  tall  as  a man.  He 
looked  at  me  and  I looked  at  him  for  maybe  ten  sec- 
onds, from  fifteen  feet  away.  His  head  was  three  times 
larger  than  a human’s.  He  had  large  pointed  ears.  His 
face  was  covered  with  fine  wrinkles,  and  his  eyes  con- 
veyed great  intelligence  and  a lack  of  emotion.  He 
had  the  look  of  a very  old  man.  I ran  away  . . .” 

“Out  of  fear?” 

“Not  really — I can’t  explain  it.  I didn’t  know  what 
else  to  do.” 

“Did  you  tell  the  story  to  anyone?”  asked  Martine. 

“I  told  my  parents  about  it.  They  laughed  at  me. 
So  I never  mentioned  it  again  for  forty-two  years.” 


97 


CHAPTER  9 


AN  EVENING  WITH 
ALEXANDER  KAZANTSEV 


There  is  not  a single  fact  that  would  indicate  that  secret 
material  objects  which  have  been  called  disks  or  saucers 
are  flying  above  us.  All  conversations  in  this  regard, 
which  have  recently  received  such  wide  dissemination 
have  the  same  source:  the  unconscionable  and  anti- 
scientific  statements  made  in  Moscow  by  irresponsible 
persons.  These  reports  relate  fantastic  fairy  tales  taken 
primarily  from  the  American  Press.  The  American  astron- 
omer [Donald]  Menzel  devoted  an  entire  book  to  an  ex- 
amination of  this  question  and  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  flying  saucers  are  nothing  but  an  optical  effect. 

Academician  Y.  A.  Artsimovich 
Pravda,  January  8,  1961 

The  serious  investigator  must  be  mindful  of  the  fact 
that  there  is  no  place  for  either  blind  credence  or  blind 
denial  in  science.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  interpret 
objective  sightings  as  ordinary  natural  phenomena.  It 
seems  to  the  authors  of  the  present  article  that  the  time 
has  come  to  give  serious  consideration  to  the  space  hy- 
pothesis about  UFOs.  They  may  be  piloted  by  intelli- 
gent beings  or  by  thinking  cybernetic  machines. 

Alexander  Kazantsev  and  Jacques  Vallee 
Trud  (Labor),  August  24,  1967 


98 


AN  EVENING  WITH  ALEXANDER  KAZANTSEV 

R/ly  correspondence  with  the  writer  Alexander  Ka- 
zantsev goes  back  to  1966.  Together  we  had  broken 
the  barrier  of  skepticism  to  coauthor  an  article  that 
caused  a sensation  in  the  Soviet  Union  when  it  ap- 
peared in  Young  Technology  Magazine  the  following 
year.29  It  was  the  first  article  in  Russian  arguing  for 
the  physical  reality  of  unidentified  flying  objects. 

A magazine  devoted  to  scientific  speculation  for 
students,  Young  Technology  Magazine  has  a circula- 
tion comparable  to  Popular  Mechanics.  But  our  arti- 
cle was  quickly  picked  up  and  reprinted  by  Trud,  the 
daily  newspaper  of  the  Soviet  labor  unions,  with  a 
circulation  of  22  million.  When  news  of  it  spread,  that 
issue  of  Trud  was  snatched  off  the  streets  by  a public 
starved  for  information  about  UFOs.  It  became  a col- 
lectors’ item  and  remains  the  most  widely  circulated 
piece  ever  published  on  the  subject  of  UFOs. 

I had  never  met  face-to-face  with  Alexander  Ka- 
zantsev. Thus  it  was  with  considerable  trepidation 
that  I climbed  the  stairs  to  his  apartment  near 
Moscow  University  in  January  1990.  I reviewed 
in  my  mind  his  literary  achievements.  Born  in  1906, 
in  Akmolinsk  in  Siberia,  two  years  before  the  fa- 
mous Tunguska  catastrophe,  he  had  graduated  from 
the  Tomsk  Technological  Institute  in  1930.  He  was 
the  author  of  such  best-sellers  as  The  Blazing  Island, 
Northern  Jetty,  and  Arctic  Bridge.  He  was  a widely 
read  popularizer  of  space  science  and  a revered  sci- 
ence fiction  author. 

It  was  also  Kazantsev  who,  in  1946,  put  forward 
the  hypothesis  that  the  Tungus  object  was  a spaceship 
fueled  by  antimatter.  Publication  of  this  theory  had 
started  an  intense  debate  among  Russian  intellectuals. 
The  skeptics  had  never  forgiven  him,  but  to  many 


99 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


young  researchers  he  had  been  a light  in  the  fog,  an 
inspiration. 

Martine  and  I had  a pleasant  surprise  when  Kazan- 
tsev opened  his  door  and  ushered  us  into  his  study: 
Alexis  Zolotov  was  there,  smiling  and  relaxed.  The 
two  were  old  friends,  we  learned.  Zolotov’s  imagina- 
tion had  been  ignited  as  a young  geologist  when  he 
read  Kazantsev’s  hypothesis  about  Tunguska. 

“Seeing  that  article  was  the  turning  point  in  my 
life,”  Zolotov  said  as  we  sat  comfortably,  our  backs 
to  the  book-laden  shelves  that  extended  from  wall  to 
wall  and  from  floor  to  ceiling. 

It  felt  warm  and  cozy  in  Alexander  Kazantsev’s 
study.  It  was  the  world  of  a writer.  For  decades  it 
had  been  a focus  for  letters,  reports,  books,  and  pho- 
tographs from  all  over  the  globe. 

“That  paper  we  published  together  back  in  the  six- 
ties caused  quite  a stir,  didn’t  it?”  I said.  Kazantsev 
laughed,  stroking  his  white  goatee.  That  gesture 
seemed  to  remind  him  of  something. 

“You’ve  worked  closely  with  Allen  Hynek.  I never 
had  a chance  to  meet  the  man,  but  they  say  that  I 
look  like  him.  Tell  me,  is  that  true?” 

I had  to  admit  there  was  a strong  resemblance,  not 
only  because  of  the  old-fashioned  goatee,  but  also  the 
professional  air,  and  the  glint  of  irony  or  humor  in 
the  eye.  Kazantsev  was  obviously  pleased  at  the  fact 
that  he  might  be  a mirror  image  of  the  American  as- 
tronomer. He  poured  us  some  cognac  and  we  started 
gossiping  like  old  friends,  without  any  agenda,  any 
fixed  plan  or  purpose. 


100 


AN  EVENING  WITH  ALEXANDER  KAZANTSEV 


SPECULATIONS  ABOUT 
TWO  SIBERIAN  CRASHES 

“So,  how  long  have  you  two  worked  together?”  I 
asked. 

“Alexis  and  I started  collaborating  in  1959  in  our 
study  of  the  Tunguska  phenomenon,”  answered  Ka- 
zantsev. 

“As  you  know,  there  were  several  expeditions,” 
broke  in  Zolotov.  “One  of  them  was  organized  by  a 
man  named  Korolev.  Researchers  were  fully  prepared 
to  discover  the  remains  of  a Martian  spacecraft!  But 
there  was  nothing  at  the  site,  nothing  at  all.” 

“Until  they  found  that  strange  piece  of  metal  in 
1975,  near  the  Varta  River,  in  the  north  country,” 
pointed  out  Kazantsev. 

“What  kind  of  metal  did  they  recover?”  I asked. 
“Was  it  analyzed?” 

“Oh,  yes,  but  that  took  a while.  It  was  silvery  and  it 
looked  like  something  that  had  been  manufactured — 
like  a tube  or  a collar.  Ten  years  later  it  was  brought 
back  to  Moscow  and  an  Academy  of  Sciences  lab  fi- 
nally analyzed  it.  They  found  it  was  an  alloy  of  some 
rare  elements:  67  percent  cesium  with  10  percent 
lanthanum  and  some  neodymium.  How  these  com- 
ponents had  been  fused  together  was  a mystery.” 

Kazantsev  launched  into  a very  technical  descrip- 
tion that  our  interpreter  had  difficulty  in  following, 
so  I will  not  hazard  to  transcribe  it  here  in  detail.  He 
did,  however,  say  that  later  studies  had  shown  the 
object  to  have  a magnetic  anomaly:  the  magnetic  field 
was  stronger  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  by  a factor 
of  fourteen.  And  the  site  where  it  was  found  was  in 
line  with  the  trajectory  of  the  Tunguska  phenomenon. 


101 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“One  possible  hypothesis  is  that  we  are  dealing  with 
a piece  of  the  object,  whatever  it  was.” 

“Yours  is  such  a disconcerting  country,”  remarked 
Martine,  “with  such  a surprising  approach  to  tech- 
nology.” 

“We  have  followed  our  own  path  in  technology,” 
Kazantsev  said.  “Don’t  forget  that  as  early  as  1910  a 
Russian  engineer  named  Tsander  proposed  an  electro- 
plane based  on  the  law  of  interaction  between  elec- 
tricity and  magnetism.  The  following  year  Karalin 
was  on  the  threshold  of  using  superconductivity.  . . . 
You  might  ask,  thinking  back  to  the  tales  of  Jonathan 
Swift:  how  can  the  island  of  Laputa  fly?  Well,  the 
island  of  Laputa  can  fly  if  it  has  a huge  superconduc- 
tive coil  to  store  electrical  energy  and  it  interacts  with 
the  earth’s  magnetic  field,  naturally  ...” 

“But  aircraft  technology  went  in  a different  direc- 
tion,” pointed  out  Zolotov. 

“Who  was  Tsander?”  I asked. 

“He  worked  with  Konstantin  Tsiolkowski.  Well,  his 
work  takes  us  back  to  the  Tunguska  object.  What  if 
UFOs  are  some  sort  of  electrical  craft?  Perhaps  the 
larger  vessels  stay  in  orbit.  What  we  see  is  only  the 
landing  module.  Perhaps  the  object  that  exploded  in 
1908  was  the  big  mother  ship.  In  1967  an  astronomer 
named  John  Bigby  claimed  to  have  cataloged  ten  small 
satellites  of  the  earth  that  were  neither  Russian  nor 
American  . . . that  was  published  in  Icarus.  He  sug- 
gested they  might  have  originated  from  a single  body 
that  exploded  about  December  18,  1955.  But  that 
would  have  been  two  years  before  Sputnik!” 

“Perhaps  it  was  in  orbit  since  1908!”  I exclaimed. 
“Is  that  what  you’re  suggesting?” 

“Yes.  Perhaps  they  had  planned  the  explosion.” 


102 


AN  EVENINC  WITH  ALEXANDER  KAZANTSEV 


“But  during  those  forty-seven  years  astronomers 
should  have  seen  the  craft  in  question  up  in  the 
sky.  I mean,  if  it  was  that  big  ...” 

“Not  necessarily.  Perhaps  it  was  painted  black. 
That  would  make  sense,  if  it  stored  thermal  energy. 
Remember  the  early  stories  about  a Black  Knight  in 
space?” 

Martine  and  I did  recall  some  speculation  about  a 
dark  satellite,  in  the  early  years  of  the  space  program. 
Rumors  about  such  an  object  had  been  sensationalized 
by  the  media,  but  nothing  concrete  had  been  found. 
This  brought  to  mind  a more  recent  event. 

“The  Western  press  has  mentioned  another  object 
that  seems  to  have  crashed  near  Dalnegorsk,  on  Jan- 
uary 29,  1986.  Have  you  looked  into  that  report?”  I 
inquired. 

“Yes,  yes.  We  have  a direct  contact  with  the  people 
who  have  studied  the  thing,  of  course.”  Kazantsev 
shrugged.  “But  it  has  a complex,  artificial  structure. 
Under  the  microscope  you  can  see  a mesh  with  fine 
gold  thread.” 

“Then  it  could  be  the  remains  of  a sophisticated 
electronic  system  that  was  destroyed  by  heat  or  an 
explosion,  don’t  you  think?” 

“Yes,  it  may  have  been  made  on  earth.  There  is  no 
indication  of  nonhuman  origin,  although  its  exact  na- 
ture remains  a mystery.” 

Our  interpreter  told  us  that  a piece  of  the  Dalne- 
gorsk object  was  preserved  at  the  Cosmos  UFO  exhibit 
in  Moscow,  and  that  arrangements  would  be  made  for 
us  to  see  and  touch  it. 


103 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


ANCIENT  STATUES 
AND  MODERN  BUREAUCRACIES 

The  rest  of  the  evening  was  spent  reminiscing  about 
the  politics  of  UFO  research  and  the  Stoliarov  period. 
Kazantsev  had  worked  closely  with  Felix  Zigel  until 
his  death.  “The  Stoliarov  committee  lasted  only  a 
month  or  so,  in  1967,  then  it  was  suddenly  closed,” 
he  told  us.  “What  an  opportunity  wasted  for  good 
research!” 

We  speculated  about  the  real  reasons  for  the  desire 
by  the  authorities,  both  in  the  Soviet  Union  as  in  the 
United  States,  to  discourage  open  research  about  the 
UFO  phenomenon.  Bureaucracies  are  closed  to  such 
inquiries  under  any  political  regime.  That,  we  agreed, 
was  one  of  the  major  lessons  one  could  draw  from  the 
UFO  enigma.  There  is  little  room  for  completely  free 
inquiry  in  modern  science. 

More  cognac  was  served  and  Alexander  Kazantsev 
opened  the  glass  doors  of  a bookcase  to  take  down  a 
series  of  remarkable  statuettes  from  ancient  Japan. 
They  showed  strange  beings  with  goggles  and  a 
breathing  apparatus. 

“Were  they  primitive  human  warriors?”  Kazantsev 
asked.  “Or  were  they  space  explorers?  This  phenom- 
enon seems  to  have  been  with  us  throughout  history,” 
added  our  host. 

We  agreed  that  prospects  for  the  future  of  this  re- 
search were  as  clearly  delineated  as  the  mystery  it  pre- 
sented for  our  science.  When  we  finally  understand 
the  nature  of  UFOs,  many  of  our  ideas  about  our- 
selves and  our  place  in  the  world  will  have  to  change. 

Perhaps  it  is  this  fundamental  change  in  man’s 
awareness  of  his  true  place  in  nature  that  authorities 


104 


AN  EVENING  WITH  ALEXANDER  KAZANTSEV 


are  trying  to  postpone  at  all  cost  until  they  can  fully 
control  it.  There  is  no  model  in  society’s  experience 
for  the  peaceful  contact  between  mankind  and  an- 
other form  of  conscious  intelligence.  Ufologists  in  all 
countries,  with  all  the  inadequacies  of  their  training, 
with  all  the  limitations  of  their  methods,  may  be  the 
first  group  of  people  to  ask  these  fundamental  ques- 
tions. 

Perhaps,  for  a long  time  to  come,  the  debate  will 
have  to  be  pursued  in  such  settings:  in  quiet,  warm 
conversations  around  a table  strewn  with  books, 
maps,  and  ancient  artifacts;  in  private  homes  where 
individual  researchers  using  their  own  resources  have 
accumulated  a lifetime  of  intriguing  records  that  all 
the  major  centers  of  learning  have  ignored. 

After  we  left  Kazantsev’s  apartment,  as  we  bundled 
up  against  the  fierce  cold  and  began  a futile  search 
for  a taxi  along  the  deserted  avenue,  it  was  hard  not 
to  reflect  again  how  fragile  such  research  was,  how 
strongly  it  rested  on  friendship  and  trust,  and  on  a 
common  passion  for  truth  among  a very  small  group 
of  individuals  spread  over  several  continents. 


105 


CHAPTER  10 


CITY  OF  THE  STARS 


Two  hundred  years  ago,  when  science  rejected  the  real- 
ity of  meteorites,  the  innate  sluggishness  of  our  think- 
ing and  the  deficiency  of  our  knowledge  hampered  the 
truth.  But  if  we  agree  that  the  past  may  be  instructive 
for  the  present,  we  cannot  reject  certain  facts  simply 
because  they  do  not  conform  to  currently  accepted  im- 
pressions of  the  world.  Nature  is  preparing  many  more 
surprises  for  mankind  and  we  must  always  be  ready  for 
them. 

Professor  Felix  Zigel 
Moscow,  February  1968 

There  was  a strange  character  who  haunted  the  hall- 
ways of  our  hotel.  One  night  he  approached  us,  prac- 
tically demanding  that  we  change  some  dollars  against 
his  rubles. 

A cluster  of  such  individuals — pimps  and  petty 
crooks,  informers,  undercover  cops — loitered  at  every 
entrance  to  the  huge  hotel,  and  we  had  to  elbow  our 
way  through  their  group  to  get  out,  showing  our  guest 
cards  to  the  guards.  Evidently  there  is  a black  market 
in  guest  cards,  explained  the  Novosti  men,  as  they  took 
us  to  a chauffeured  car  for  a trip  beyond  the  borders 
of  Moscow. 


106 


CITY  OF  THE  STARS 


Only  a few  years  ago  the  training  center  for  Soviet 
cosmonauts— the  prestigious  City  of  the  Stars — was 
strictly  off-limits  to  foreigners  and  to  ordinary  Soviet 
citizens  themselves.  It  was  a secret,  self-contained 
complex  where  test  pilots,  scientists,  and  cosmonauts 
lived  with  their  families.  In  recent  years  a more  lib- 
eral approach  was  established.  It  was  no  longer  com- 
pulsory for  families  to  live  cloistered  behind  the  fence, 
in  the  multistoried  buildings  where  Yuri  Gagarin  and 
all  the  early  pioneers  of  Soviet  space  science  had  once 
made  their  homes. 

All  this  was  explained  to  us  by  our  guides  as  we 
drove  for  nearly  an  hour  through  the  Moscow  traffic 
jams,  passing  long,  slow  lines  of  uniformly  green, 
sturdy  Soviet  trucks.  New  snow  was  falling,  putting  a 
happy  frame  of  white  on  the  green  and  blue  painted 
wood  of  the  ornamented  dachas  that  belonged  to  the 
more  fortunate  suburbanites.  Some  of  the  buildings 
exhibited  fancy  gingerbread  that  would  have  been  at 
home  in  the  Victorian-era  sections  of  San  Francisco. 

Eventually  we  found  ourselves  driving  on  a mod- 
ern, straight  road  with  woods  on  both  sides.  We 
reached  a crossroads  where  a MiG  jet  fighter  was 
pointing  at  the  sky,  projecting  from  a huge  concrete 
pedestal.  We  turned  away  from  the  highway  and  en- 
tered a large  complex.  Our  identities  were  carefully 
checked  at  the  guardhouse.  A few  minutes  later  we 
had  penetrated  a different  world,  the  inner  sanctum 
of  Soviet  high  tech.  The  chauffeur  parked  the  car  in 
fresh,  ankle-deep  snow  in  front  of  the  main  building 
where  dozens  of  cosmonauts  had  received  their  basic 
training. 


107 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


THE  COSMONAUT  TRAINING  CENTER 

As  we  stepped  into  the  building  with  our  guides  (an 
officer  of  the  center  had  now  joined  our  Novosti  in- 
terpreter), we  were  all  aware  that  we  were  not  enter- 
ing just  another  scientific  institute.  The  Soviet  Union 
has  placed  a high  priority  on  space  research,  and  it 
has  not  wavered  in  its  determination  since  the  fifties. 
While  the  United  States  and  Europe  went  through  pe- 
riods of  high  investment  (and  high  achievement)  in 
space  research  followed  by  long  stretches  of  utter  ap- 
athy, the  managers  of  the  Soviet  plan  went  ahead  with 
unrelenting  energy.  As  a result,  although  they  lagged 
in  many  high-technology  fields  and  never  repeated  the 
American  feat  of  landing  on  the  moon,  they  had  ac- 
cumulated twice  the  experience  of  the  United  States 
in  terms  of  weeks,  months,  and  years  of  spaceflight. 

The  man  who  greeted  us  at  the  center  was  Valentin 
Zudov,  a veteran  cosmonaut  who  was  now  in  charge 
of  the  training  program,  sometimes  serving  as  a mem- 
ber of  a backup  team. 

“I  flew  aboard  Soyuz,”  he  explained  in  response  to 
one  of  Martine’s  questions.  “Our  flight  had  complex 
technical  problems  and  we  had  to  abort  after  two  days 
in  space.  We  landed  in  a lake.” 

Zudov  made  it  clear  that  the  experience  had  left 
him  awed  with  the  difficulties  and  the  dangers  of  space 
flight.  How  appropriate,  we  reflected,  to  place  at  the 
head  of  the  training  program  a man  who  had  had 
firsthand  experience  with  the  limitations  of  the  pilots 
and  of  the  hardware,  a man  who  had  stared  at  the 
possibility  of  death  in  orbit. 

With  Zudov  as  a guide,  we  visited  laboratories  and 
testing  rooms.  We  saw  the  various  models  of  space 


108 


CITY  OF  THE  STARS 


suits  used  in  extravehicular  activities,  and  we  stopped 
on  a wide  gallery  that  overlooked  a full-scale  dupli- 
cate of  the  Mir  space  station. 

“Two  of  our  cosmonauts  have  now  been  aboard  Mir 
for  164  days,”  Zudov  said  proudly.  “What  you  see 
down  there  is  not  a mock-up,  it  is  the  twin  brother  of 
the  actual  station.  We  use  it  for  every  test,  every  ma- 
neuver, every  program,  before  we  send  instructions  to 
duplicate  the  same  motion  in  space.” 

PSYCHIC  FUNCTIONING 

As  a journalist  who  specialized  in  covering  space  de- 
velopments, Martine  had  many  questions  about  the 
Soviet  program.  She  found  an  atmosphere  of  frank- 
ness and  candor  that  she  had  rarely  experienced  be- 
fore. 

This,  in  turn,  encouraged  me  to  ask  about  an  aspect 
of  the  cosmonauts’  activities  that  had  never  been  men- 
tioned publicly,  to  my  knowledge.  “Do  you  use  para- 
psychological  techniques  as  part  of  the  training?”  I 
bluntly  asked  Zudov. 

A year  or  so  before,  I have  no  doubt  the  question 
would  not  have  been  answered.  The  interpreter  might 
even  have  thought  it  unnecessary  to  translate  it.  In- 
stead, Zudov  smiled  and  told  me  without  any  reti- 
cence: “We  only  bring  in  parapsychologists  to  help  in 
training  for  the  long-duration  flights,  when  we  need 
to  achieve  the  best  meditation  and  concentration  abil- 
ities.” 

It  was  my  turn  to  smile  as  I imagined  what  might 
happen  if  I posed  the  same  question  to  NASA  officials 
in  the  United  States,  or  to  CNES  in  Paris.  (During  the 
Apollo  program,  astronaut  Edgar  Mitchell  did  con- 


109 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


duct  some  personal  experiments  in  telepathy  from  or- 
bit, but  NASA  always  declined  to  admit  there  might 
be  something  to  psychic  functioning.) 

Is  hypnosis  used  in  combination  with  psychic 
training?”  I asked  Zudov. 

“No,  we  do  not  do  anything  that  might  impede  the 
free  functioning  of  the  brain.” 

We  also  discussed  the  specific  problems  of  long- 
duration  flights,  a subject  that  has  been  minimized  in 
the  press.  We  were  told  frankly  that  even  after  a year 
crew  members  had  not  completely  returned  to  nor- 
mal. It  is  standard  practice  for  cosmonauts  to  have 
children  before  such  missions  rather  than  after,  for 
fear  of  genetic  malformations  in  later  births.  Several 
Soviet  cosmonauts,  notably  Titov,  have  spent  over  a 
year  in  space. 

We  found  the  same  attitude  of  pragmatic  frankness 
when  it  came  to  the  UFO  subject.  “There  are  many 
reports  of  unexplained  phenomena  in  the  atmo- 
sphere,” said  Zudov.  “Unfortunately,  none  of  our  cos- 
monauts ever  observed  them  from  orbit,  although 
some  have  seen  UFOs  from  the  ground.” 

When  we  asked  for  details  we  were  told  that  cos- 
monaut Nicholas  Provotkin  had  seen  a series  of  bright 
spheres  in  1978.  They  seemed  equipped  with  winglike 
appendages.  Similarly,  it  seems  that  none  of  the  U.S. 
astronauts  has  actually  observed  a UFO  from  orbit, 
although  Gordon  Cooper  told  me  that  he  had  watched 
some  flying  craft  he  could  not  recognize  when  he  was 
a test  pilot.  He  was  on  the  ground  at  the  time. 

This  led  us  to  a discussion  about  the  possibility  of 
discovering  intelligence  in  the  cosmos.  Our  Soviet 
hosts  said  they  were  increasingly  optimistic,  citing  ob- 
servations of  planetlike  masses  near  Vega  recently 


110 


CITY  OF  THE  STARS 


made  by  a Norwegian  satellite.  The  search  for  life  in 
deep  space  is  clearly  one  of  the  intellectual  motiva- 
tions behind  the  Soviet  program. 

THE  SPACE  STATION 

We  went  downstairs  to  the  floor  of  the  huge  hangar 
to  walk  around  the  space  station,  which  was  made  up 
of  components  that  can  be  assembled  at  various  dock- 
ing rings  and  connected  through  hatches  and  airlocks. 
The  only  people  we  saw  aboard  the  station  were  com- 
puter programmers.  They  were  developing  new  soft- 
ware for  the  experiments  conducted  in  orbit.  The 
programs  would  be  beamed  up  (one  could  hardly 
speak  of  downloading)  to  the  space  station. 

The  visit  was  continued  with  a tour  of  the  training 
facility  for  extravehicular  activities— in  other  words, 
complex  excursions  in  space.  The  facility  consisted  of 
a large  water  tank,  twenty-three  meters  in  diameter, 
housed  in  a special  building.  When  fully  suited,  the 
cosmonauts  are  in  perfect  equilibrium  within  the  tank, 
which  contains  5,000  cubic  meters  of  water.  We 
watched  typical  training  sessions  on  videotape,  after 
which  we  looked  through  the  portholes  of  the  huge 
tank  itself. 

Spacecraft  mock-ups  allow  the  cosmonauts  to  prac- 
tice opening  and  closing  hatches,  going  out  of  the  Mir 
space  station,  and  performing  such  delicate  tasks  as 
deploying  solar  panels. 

“Each  cosmonaut  goes  through  twelve  or  thirteen 
such  sessions,”  we  were  told.  “And  it  is  typical  for 
them  to  lose  six  pounds  in  four  hours,  the  duration  of 
each  session.” 

Oddly  enough,  in  the  midst  of  these  high-tech  won- 


111 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


ders,  we  were  most  impressed  by  the  simple  display 
of  two  old  space  capsules  from  the  earliest  manned 
flights.  They  had  been  brought  back  from  their  land- 
ing sites,  all  burned  and  black  from  their  fiery  re- 
entry, and  sat  on  the  floor  of  the  Mir  facility.  Next  to 
the  space  station,  whose  majestic  structures  towered 
above  them,  they  looked  ludicrously  small  and  frag- 
ile. The  image  that  came  to  mind  as  we  touched  the 
charred  metal  of  the  cone-shaped  capsules  that  peeled 
off  under  the  hand  was  that  of  Jules  Verne’s  lunar 
explorers,  which  he  had  imagined  shot  out  of  the 
mouth  of  a giant  cannon — a testament  to  an  era  of 
metallurgy  and  the  brute  force  of  progress,  of  incred- 
ible adventure  and  individual  courage.  With  their  tiny 
windows  and  the  huge  thickness  of  their  skin  they 
seemed  to  have  been  winched  up  from  the  depth  of 
the  sea  rather  than  picked  up  from  the  snow  like  the 
artificial  meteorites  they  actually  were. 

Martine  and  I had  seen  actual  spacecraft  on  several 
occasions,  but  always  before  they  had  been  launched. 
We  were  not  fully  prepared  for  the  sight  of  the  crazy 
machines  when  they  came  back  to  earth. 

Here,  again,  the  lesson  was  clear.  A man  had  ac- 
tually inhabited  this  tiny  cone  of  burning  metal  as  it 
descended  through  the  atmosphere,  surrounded  by 
glowing  plasma,  unable  to  communicate  by  radio 
with  the  crews  that  were  supposedly  waiting  to  re- 
cover him  alive.  And  that  was  the  lesson  men  like  Zu- 
dov  wanted  their  students  to  learn.  Astronautics  101 
began  with  a tour  of  burned-out  hardware  that  had 
nothing  pretty  about  it.  All  the  glamour,  all  the  su- 
perficial glory,  all  the  mythology  had  been  stripped 
and  blasted  off  the  skin  of  those  capsules  on  the  way 


112 


CITY  OF  THE  STARS 


down.  What  was  left  was  a basic  combination  of  raw 
metal  and  pure  human  courage. 

We  ended  our  visit  to  the  City  of  the  Stars  with  a 
few  quiet  moments  in  the  former  office  of  Yuri  Ga- 
garin, the  first  man  in  space. 

Upon  his  return  to  earth,  Gagarin  had  been  made 
a hero  of  his  country,  honored  by  Nikita  Khrushchev 
and  given  a special  office  that  was  preserved  exactly 
as  it  was  on  the  day  of  his  death,  ft  is  a simple  but 
large  rectangular  room,  with  a map  of  the  world  on 
the  back  wall  and  a plain  wooden  desk.  Perpendicular 
to  the  desk  is  a small  meeting  table  with  four  chairs. 
It  has  become  a tradition  for  cosmonauts  to  spend 
some  time  in  personal  meditation,  sitting  at  that  table 
before  leaving  on  a mission,  aware  that  they  might  be 
living  their  last  hours  on  planet  earth. 

I found  the  experience  strangely  moving.  And  in 
response  to  Martine’s  questions,  we  learned  some  of 
the  details  of  Gagarin’s  death.  The  world  had  been 
told  that  he  had  crashed  during  a routine  training 
flight,  at  the  controls  of  a MiG.  What  the  world  had 
not  been  told  was  that  he  was  drunk  at  the  time.  He 
plowed  through  the  trees  and  crashed  in  the  nearby 
forest. 

“He  lost  sight  of  what  it  meant  to  be  a mere  mor- 
tal,” our  guide  told  us  sadly.  “He  was  hailed  every- 
where as  a hero,  the  first  man  in  space.  He  thought 
he  could  do  anything,  dare  anything,  always  go  far- 
ther ...” 

There  is  a dramatic  photograph  on  the  wall  of  Ga- 
garin’s office  in  the  City  of  the  Stars.  It  simply  shows 
a plain  clump  of  trees  with  their  tops  sheared  off,  un- 
der an  empty  sky.  I am  not  ashamed  to  confess  it:  that 


113 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


poignant  picture,  more  eloquent  than  a thousand 
speeches,  brought  tears  to  my  eyes.  It  certainly  ex- 
plained why  cosmonauts  found  it  useful  to  spend  some 
time  in  that  office  in  meditation  about  the  earth  life 
they  were  leaving  behind,  and  why  the  man  in  charge 
of  their  training  was  a veteran  of  a crippled  space- 
craft. During  our  visit  to  the  City  of  the  Stars  we  did 
not  meet  anyone  who  thought  the  path  to  the  cosmos 
would  be  an  easy  one. 


114 


CHAPTER  11 


UNDERGROUND: 
CONVERSATIONS  AROUND 
A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


The  Russian  tradition  of  natural  healing  has  always 
preserved  the  ancient  ways  under  the  Orthodox 
Church,  under  the  tsar,  and  even  under  commu- 
nism. . . . We’re  ahead  of  you  in  the  study  of  the  para- 
normal because  the  Western  churches  killed  all  your 
witches  in  the  name  of  their  dogma.  You  only  have 
yourselves  to  blame  if  you  have  fewer  gifted  psychics. 
You’ve  eliminated  their  genes  from  the  gene  pool. 

Healers  Eugene  and  Larissa  Kolessov 

Moscow,  January  1990 


UT 

■ hey  have  planned  some  boring  meeting  for  you 
this  evening,”  said  one  of  the  young  journalist  friends 
we  had  made  at  Novosti.  “But  it  would  be  a lot  more 
fun  for  you  to  meet  some  of  our  unconventional  re- 
searchers.” 

We  agreed  to  dump  the  official  program  and  to  go 
off  into  the  cold  night  in  search  of  the  Soviet  New 
Age.  Soon  we  were  seated  around  a large  table  in  yet 


115 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


another  cramped  apartment,  discussing  the  paranor- 
mal with  two  young  practitioners,  Eugene  Kolessov 
and  his  wife,  Larissa.  In  a corner  of  the  room  was  a 
very  modern-looking  IBM  personal  computer  clone, 
in  the  process  of  being  repaired  by  a young  technical 
wizard  I will  call  Grishka. 


A HOLISTIC  PERSPECTIVE 

“We  started  seven  years  ago,”  said  Eugene.  “We  were 
trained  in  human  science  and  philology,  and  it  is  an 
accident  that  decided  our  fate,  when  we  found  that 
we  could  heal  pain  by  natural  techniques,  such  as 
touching  the  patient  s head.  This  led  us  in  turn  to 
study  homeopathy  and  acupuncture.” 

Martine  expressed  surprise  that  such  traditional 
forms  of  healing,  which  are  often  regarded  in  the  West 
as  little  more  than  superstition,  could  have  survived 
in  the  harsher  political  realities  of  the  Soviet  Union. 

Things  are  not  as  dark  as  they  seem,”  answered 
Larissa.  The  Russian  tradition  of  natural  healing  has 
always  preserved  the  ancient  ways  under  the  Ortho- 
dox Church,  under  the  tsar,  and  even  under  commu- 
nism. “Homeopathy,  historically,  spread  very  widely 
through  Germany  and  Russia.  In  the  thirties  one  So- 
viet drugstore  out  of  two  sold  homeopathic  remedies.” 

Don  t forget  that  Stalin  himself  once  ordered  an 
experiment  with  5,000  patients  who  had  various  ill- 
nesses, added  Eugene.  “Half  were  treated  with  ho- 
meopathy, the  others  with  classical  techniques.  The 
results  were  inconclusive  when  an  assessment  was 
made  after  one  year.  Many  of  the  patients  treated  by 
homeopathy  were  found  to  be  cured,  but  the  medical 
profession  claimed  they  must  have  recovered  sponta- 


116 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


neously.  The  influence  of  homeopathy  diminished  but 
was  never  eliminated;  today  you  can  still  find  one 
clinic  and  six  pharmacies  in  Moscow  that  are  dedi- 
cated to  it.  We  feel  these  techniques  apply  best  to  chil- 
dren and  to  older  people.” 

Around  the  room  were  many  shelves  with  books.  It 
was  obvious  that  knowledge  was  revered  here  to  a 
degree  that  our  information-saturated  world  had  for- 
gotten. The  West  is  spoiled  with  the  richness  of  its 
media,  and  it  is  losing  the  ability  to  preserve  some 
important  insights.  Unless  an  idea  is  presented  in  a 
package  that  can  be  neatly  marketed  and  can  fit  nicely 
on  the  bookstore’s  shelf,  it  does  not  actually  reach  the 
average  person.  Russia  has  never  had  such  a distri- 
bution system.  Instead,  ideas  percolated  among  stu- 
dents, scholars,  and  private  groups  who  created  a 
veritable  cult  around  the  books  that  influenced  them. 
This  is  the  way  it  may  have  been  in  Western  Europe 
before  the  invention  of  mass  media,  I found  myself 
musing.  In  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries, 
when  there  were  still  such  things  as  genuine  intellec- 
tual movements,  and  when  new  ideas  were  debated 
rather  than  mass  marketed  and  hammered  into  the 
public’s  mind  by  television,  this  is  what  every  evening 
with  intelligent  friends  must  have  been  like. 

Some  of  the  shelves  did  not  hold  books  but  boxes  of 
medication,  most  of  them  based  on  herbal  remedies 
that  were  as  old  as  the  oldest  medical  treatises. 
There  were  rules  for  taking  such  remedies,  we  were 
told,  and  they  had  to  do  with  certain  astrological  con- 
ditions. 

When  I told  our  hosts  that  from  my  own  observa- 
tions I thought  astrology  was  a flawed  system,  Larissa 
shook  her  head  and  gently  argued.  “Astrology  is  a sci- 


117 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


ence  of  man,  not  a science  of  the  sky.  All  the  sciences 
of  man  are  interrelated.” 

“Astrology  is  akin  to  sociopsychology,”  Eugene 
added.  “It  is  not  an  exact  science.  It  has  to  do  with 
the  behavior  of  large  masses  of  people.  Matter,  en- 
ergy, and  information  are  related,”  he  went  on,  going 
back  to  the  argument  we  had  begun  with  Zolotov, 
and  with  the  group  from  Voronezh. 

“Is  that  what  is  creating  so  much  interest  in  what 
you  call  biolocation?”  I wanted  to  know. 

“We  experience  it  every  day.  For  example,  Grishka, 
here,  knows  how  to  create  a psychic  imprint  in  a stone 
by  fixing  his  sight  on  it — or  into  it.  But  it  turns  out 
that  water  is  the  best  medium  to  fix  information.” 

“We  never  expected  to  find  such  a high  level  of  in- 
terest in  the  paranormal  in  the  Soviet  Union,”  I told 
our  hosts  as  I looked  at  the  hundreds  of  books  along 
the  shelves.  The  topics  they  covered  ranged  from  as- 
trology and  healing  to  spiritism  and  psychic  research. 

“Is  that  due  to  something  about  Russian  tradi- 
tions?” asked  Martine.  “Clearly,  it  is  rooted  at  a level 
that  political  systems  could  not  touch.” 

“We’re  ahead  of  you  in  the  study  of  the  paranormal 
because  the  Western  churches  killed  all  your  witches 
in  the  name  of  their  dogma,”  answered  Eugene.  “You 
only  have  yourselves  to  blame  if  you  have  fewer  gifted 
psychics.  You’ve  eliminated  their  genes  from  the  gene 
pool.” 

How  does  that  explain  that  there  would  be  so 
much  acceptance  of  parapsychology  as  a field  of  re- 
search in  your  country,  when  it  is  still  treated  as  a 
marginal  or  even  flaky  discipline  in  the  West?”  I in- 
quired. 

“When  it  was  at  the  apex  of  its  power  the  Western 


118 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


church  killed  over  three  million  witches  in  the  name 
of  God,”  continued  Eugene.  “In  proportion  to  the 
overall  human  population  at  the  time,  this  was  a ter- 
rible, unforgivable  genocide.  Many  of  those  who  died 
at  the  hands  of  your  priests  were  young  women  who 
had  not  produced  offspring.  We  have  done  many  bad 
things  in  Russia,  but  we  have  never  hunted  down 
witches  on  such  a scale.  Our  gene  pool  is  still  rich  in 
psychic  ability.” 

This  interpretation  can  be  debated  on  historical 
grounds,  however.  My  friend  Larissa  Vilenskaya,  her- 
self a gifted  psychic  researcher,  has  pointed  out  that 
in  the  Middle  Ages  witches  were  burned  at  the  stake 
in  Russia  just  as  they  were  in  Western  Europe.  In  a 
letter  to  me  she  gave  several  examples. 

In  1227,  four  witches  were  put  to  the  flames  in  the 
court  of  an  archbishop  in  Novgorod.  In  the  beginning 
of  the  fifteenth  century  ten  sorcerers  were  destroyed 
in  Pskov.  In  a tale  about  witches  written  for  Ivan  the 
Terrible,  fire  was  prescribed  as  the  proper  punish- 
ment for  witchcraft. 

Vilenskaya  even  quoted  a disgruntled  seventeenth- 
century  Russian  who  spied  for  Sweden.  In  a report 
for  his  new  employer  he  described  witchcraft  prac- 
tices in  Russia,  adding  that  women  were  sometimes 
buried  up  to  their  breasts  and  left  to  die  for  their  oc- 
cult practices. 

Vilenskaya’s  speculation  on  the  large  number  of 
psychics  in  the  Soviet  Union  is  more  pragmatic.  “Be- 
cause parapsychological  research  has  been  kept  un- 
derground so  long,  there  has  been  virtually  complete 
silence  in  the  press,  with  little  pro  or  con  debate.”  As 


119 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


a result,  the  Soviet  public  has  not  been  exposed  to  as 
much  exaggeration,  false  claims,  and  negative  public- 
ity as  the  Western  audience.  “People  allowed  them- 
selves to  function  psychically,”  she  concluded,  “or 
more  precisely,  did  not  prevent  themselves  from  man- 
ifesting these  abilities  because  of  negative  cultural 
conditioning.” 

During  my  stay  in  Moscow  I thought  it  was  an 
ironic  contradiction  to  see  the  materialistic  society  of 
the  Soviet  Union  running  out  of  food  and  material 
goods,  while  in  the  idealistic  West  supermarket  shelves 
were  bending  under  the  weight  of  every  delicacy  and 
every  possible  gadget.  Yet  it  was  in  the  Soviet  Union 
that  spirituality  seemed  to  thrive,  among  people  who 
had  an  almost  instinctive  grasp  of  issues  Western  sci- 
entists were  trying  so  hard  to  define. 


TOWARD  THE  TWENTY-FIRST  CENTURY 

The  time  was  getting  late  and  the  world  outside  had 
long  ago  retired  into  silence  and  night.  There  is  not 
much  traffic  along  Moscow  streets  after  the  evening 
commute,  and  it  was  easy  to  forget  the  city.  Larissa 
and  Eugene  produced  an  excellent  dinner,  which  we 
ate  by  candlelight.  We  settled  down  for  a long  eve- 
ning of  conversation. 

My  notes  become  sketchy  at  this  point,  but  I re- 
member that  the  discussion  ranged  from  the  nature 
and  meaning  of  UFOs  to  computers  and  high  tech- 
nology and  back  to  the  mysteries  of  biolocation.  Much 
of  it  had  to  do  with  the  future,  a subject  that  fasci- 
nates mainstream  Soviet  intellectuals  much  more  than 
it  does  contemporary  Western  thinkers.  In  the  United 
States  the  futurist  movement  of  the  fifties  and  sixties, 


120 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


led  by  such  people  and  organizations  as  Herman 
Kahn,  author  of  The  Year  2000,  the  Hudson  Institute, 
the  Rand  Corporation,  and  the  Stanford  Research  In- 
stitute (from  which  many  other  groups  had  spun  off), 
had  been  gradually  fragmented  into  an  array  of  teams 
working  out  short-term  technical  forecasts  that  used 
the  methodology  these  pioneers  had  created.  Perhaps 
that  was  a measure  of  their  success.  But  with  better 
technical  forecasting  had  come  a loss  of  vision.  Out- 
side the  New  Age  groups,  whose  outlook  was  made 
suspect  by  reliance  on  channeling  and  spirit  guides, 
few  people  were  left  to  ask  why  we  should  explore 
space,  or  what  to  do  with  population  issues  in  the 
developing  world.  The  day-to-day  handling  of  such 
problems  was  left  to  major  corporations,  to  industry 
groups,  to  the  World  Bank.  Only  in  the  growing  con- 
cern for  the  environment  was  there  an  intense  debate 
involving  diverging  visions  of  the  future;  but  that  de- 
bate, too,  was  becoming  more  and  more  political.  The 
scientific  issues  were  increasingly  precise,  but  deci- 
sions were  made  in  the  voting  booth,  and  they  were 
swayed  by  a level  of  media  bombardment  that  clouded 
all  the  issues. 

The  Soviets,  on  the  other  hand,  still  regarded  the 
future  with  the  somewhat  naive  passion  of  a Jules 
Verne  or  an  H.  G.  Wells.  To  them,  the  existence  of 
nonhuman  consciousness  was  a key  factor. 

“It  is  the  twenty-first  century  that  will  determine  the 
key  position  of  our  race’s  ultimate  destiny,”  said  Larissa. 
“It  will  define  mankind’s  place  in  the  cosmos.” 

“And  it  may  bring  us  into  contact  with  alien  races,” 
added  Eugene.  “There  must  be  other  beings  in  the 
universe.  They  may  have  a form  of  consciousness 
higher  than  our  own.” 


121 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“Does  that  necessarily  mean  that  the  UFO  phenom- 
enon is  caused  by  extraterrestrials?”  I asked.  “Do  they 
necessarily  have  to  be  from  another  planet?  Are  they 
necessarily  more  evolved  than  we  are?” 

“No,  of  course  not,”  said  Larissa.  “Perhaps  the 
UFOs  simply  represent  another  form  of  our  own  ex- 
istence here.” 

We  asked  her  to  clarify  what  she  meant. 

Well,  what  we  know  about  these  beings  is  that 
they  seem  to  be  curious  of  us,  yet  their  physical  sub- 
stance is  different  from  ours  . . . they  could  be  related 
to  the  human  soul,  a reflection  of  a world  beyond 
death.” 

Sensing  our  skepticism,  Larissa  added:  “Look  at 
poltergeist  phenomena.  Don’t  they  seem  to  belong  to 
the  same  class  of  unexplained  effects  caused  by  a con- 
sciousness that  is  close  to  the  human  realm?” 

We  never  resolved  that  issue,  although  arguments 
were  presented  back  and  forth,  invoking  various  hy- 
potheses, and  the  reports  of  witnesses  who  had  re- 
ported close  encounters,  abductions,  and  related 
anomalies. 

Grishka,  who  had  followed  the  debate  from  a cor- 
ner of  the  room,  broke  into  the  conversation  with  an 
unexpected  comment.  “You  know,  there  is  a bias  in 
these  observations.  Somebody  has  remarked  that  peo- 
ple often  don’t  always  report  what  they  see.  In  fact, 
the  more  bizarre  the  sighting,  the  lower  the  chance 
they  will  make  a report.” 

“Where  did  you  find  that  observation?”  I inquired, 
curious  to  learn  who  could  have  done  this  kind  of  re- 
search in  the  Soviet  Union. 

Oh,  I read  it  in  a book  I have.  The  author  even 
gives  a curve  for  this  probability:  people  tend  to  re- 


122 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


port  those  sightings  that  are  a little  strange  but  not 
too  strange.  When  they  see  something  very  close  and 
very  scary,  they  only  tell  their  family.” 

“What’s  the  title  of  that  book?” 

“It’s  called  The  Invisible  College.” 

That  remark  left  us  stunned.  The  interpreter  ex- 
plained to  Grishka  that  I had  written  the  book  in 
question.  In  fact,  I had  a copy  of  The  Invisible  Col- 
lege with  me  that  evening,  which  I intended  as  a gift 
for  the  Kolessovs.30 

It  was  their  turn  to  be  speechless. 

“How  could  you  know  about  this  book?”  I asked 
Grishka.  “None  of  my  works  have  been  translated  into 
Russian.” 

“We  know  your  works.  They  circulate  here  in  sa- 
mizdat form,  underground.  We  type  such  books  our- 
selves. We  make  copies.  We  pass  them  around.” 

Eugene  enthusiastically  produced  a bottle  of  vodka, 
and  we  drank  a toast  to  celebrate  an  evening  that 
seemed  blessed  by  interesting  coincidences.  Larissa 
went  back  to  describing  her  personal  interpretations 
of  astrology  and  the  specialized  software  they  were 
designing  to  cast  horoscopes.  She  computed  the  data 
she  claimed  was  related  to  Martine’s  future  and  to 
mine.  We  spoke  of  the  problems  of  the  world,  of  Gor- 
bachev, of  the  prospect  for  peace,  of  the  great  changes 
that  were  sweeping  Europe.  Someone  quoted  Dosto- 
yevsky: “It  is  the  tragic  destiny  of  Russia  to  teach  im- 
portant lessons  to  the  world,  by  showing  it  what  it 
should  not  do!” 

That  poignant  phrase  remained  with  us  as  we  left 
our  new  friends,  aware  that  we  had  only  begun  our 
debate.  Rut  perhaps  we  will  be  able  to  resume  it  in 
the  future. 


123 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


When  she  calculated  the  planetary  positions  that 
she  claimed  could  influence  my  life,  Larissa  predicted 
that  I would  return.  “Destiny  puts  you  at  the  right 
place,”  she  said  with  a tone  of  complete  certainty.  I 
smiled  and  she  added:  “I  am  aware  of  your  skepti- 
cism. But  you  will  come  back  to  Moscow.” 


AT  THE  EXHIBITION  PARK 

We  were  still  thinking  about  Dostoyevsky’s  remark  the 
next  morning  when  we  visited  the  permanent  exhibi- 
tion on  Soviet  achievements.  It  is  situated  in  a large 
park,  with  various  pavilions  and  buildings  dedicated 
to  the  major  fields  of  agriculture  and  industry,  and 
linked  together  by  a light  rail  system.  I remembered 
visiting  it  with  my  wife  at  the  time  of  the  Moscow 
mathematics  congress  in  1966,  and  I was  shocked  at 
the  changes.  Some  buildings  were  closed,  many  were 
dilapidated,  and  an  atmosphere  of  utter  desolation 
hung  over  the  park,  made  even  more  dramatic  by  a 
new  layer  of  crisp  snow  that  crackled  ominously  un- 
der our  boots. 

Just  as  I was  beginning  to  get  depressed  by  the 
heaviness  of  the  scene,  however,  an  incident  created 
a welcome  diversion. 

We  had  taken  our  seats  in  the  open  cars  of  the  little 
train  that  went  slowly  through  the  park,  and  I found 
myself  next  to  the  ticket  machine.  Typical  of  the  So- 
viet way  of  doing  business,  the  machine  was  operated 
on  a voluntary  basis.  It  was  little  more  than  a coin 
box  with  a slot  and  a crank  to  dispense  the  tickets. 
Our  guide  had  put  a few  kopeks  into  it  and  taken 
tickets  for  all  of  us. 

At  the  next  stop  an  old  woman  climbed  aboard  with 


124 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


a small  boy,  probably  her  grandson.  The  first  thing 
she  did  after  she  sat  down  was  to  thrust  some  kopeks 
into  my  hand;  she  was  obviously  expecting  me  to  do 
something,  speaking  in  Russian  with  impatient  au- 
thority when  I failed  to  react.  After  he  stopped  laugh- 
ing, our  Novosti  interpreter  explained  to  me  that  since 
I was  seated  next  to  the  ticket  machine  it  was  now  my 
responsibility  to  put  kopeks  into  the  slot  and  to  crank 
out  tickets. 

Another  stop,  another  group  of  grandmothers  with 
laughing  kids,  another  handful  of  kopeks,  another  in- 
comprehensible series  of  commands  in  Russian.  By 
now  I knew  what  to  do.  I just  fed  the  machine  and 
gave  out  tickets. 

“You  see,  I have  only  been  in  Moscow  three  days 
and  already  I have  an  important  job,”  I told  Martine 
proudly.  “If  the  hotel  never  returns  our  passports,  I 
can  always  stay  here  and  perform  a useful  function.” 

The  Russian  kids  heard  us  speaking  in  a funny  lan- 
guage and  laughed  at  us  even  harder,  so  that  it  was  a 
very  happy  group  of  people  that  finally  arrived  at  the 
Cosmos  building. 

When  I had  seen  it  in  the  sixties,  the  space  exhibit 
housed  replicas  of  Sputniks  I and  II,  a few  mock-ups 
of  space  capsules,  and  an  incomplete  model  of  a cos- 
monaut suit.  With  the  greater  policy  of  openness, 
many  of  the  exhibits  had  changed.  There  were  now 
actual  space  vehicles  rather  than  fake  ones,  and  the 
suits  were  real.  (We  had  just  seen  and  touched  the 
latest  models  at  the  City  of  the  Stars.)  But  there  was 
another  innovation,  an  entire  section  devoted  to  un- 
identified flying  objects.  The  exhibit  included  photo- 
graphs, paintings,  books,  and  artifacts.  It  even 
covered  such  sociological  phenomena  as  UFO  cults 


125 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


and  contactee  mythology,  which  we  were  surprised  to 
learn  was  also  a factor  in  the  USSR. 

The  topic  of  cults  and  other  extreme  belief  systems 
linked  to  UFO  contact  is  a touchy  one  with  many  stu- 
dents of  the  phenomenon.  When  I published  Messen- 
gers of  Deception  in  1979,  many  ufologists  (notably 
those  who  belonged  to  organized  groups)  reacted  to 
the  book  with  a level  of  anger  that  was  out  of  pro- 
portion to  the  comments  I had  offered.  After  carefully 
studying  several  contactee  organizations  and  occult 
groups,  some  of  which  I had  actually  joined  for  a short 
time,  I had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  high-demand 
sects  were  a very  significant  component  of  UFO  my- 
thology, although  they  had  no  hard  data  and  no  in- 
sight into  the  actual  nature  of  the  phenomenon. 

It  is  an  observation  that  seems  so  obvious  today  that 
it  no  longer  raises  any  arguments.  At  the  time,  how- 
ever, Messengers  of  Deception  made  many  ufologists 
squirm,  perhaps  because  they  had  never  realized  that 
they  themselves  were  driven  by  a deep-seated  desire 
to  believe  in  extraterrestrials.31 

There  is  the  truth  we  seek  and  the  truth  we  need  to 
believe  in,  and  these  two  truths  are  not  necessarily 
identical. 

The  same  observation  applied  to  the  Soviet  Union, 
where  genuine  UFO  data  are  buried  within  hoaxes, 
undocumented  tales,  and  an  enormous  mass  of  wish- 
ful thinking.  There  were  people  who  were  sincerely 
looking  for  the  key  to  the  UFO  mystery,  and  there 
were  some  who  had  already  found  it,  including  a 
bearded  character  named  Porphyry  Ivanov  who  had 
started  his  own  cosmic  community.  We  were  told  that 
astronaut  Edgar  Mitchell  had  once  visited  with  Iva- 
nov and  told  him  that  he  had  “seen  him  on  the  Moon.” 


126 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


Whether  this  dialogue  actually  happened  or  was  an- 
other example  of  the  wild  UFO  rumors  that  circulate 
among  the  Soviet  New  Age,  we  were  unable  to  verify. 
We  did  see  photographs  that  showed  Ivanov  with  his 
disciples  running  half-naked  through  the  snow. 

We  were  told  there  was  another  extraterrestrial  cult 
of  UFO  worshippers  based  in  Riga.  Its  leader  is  said 
to  be  retired  teacher  Zinaida  Robertovna,  but  we 
were  given  no  other  details. 

Several  photographs  in  the  exhibit  showed  truly 
unexplained  phenomena.  In  conversations  with  the 
organizers,  including  Boris  Churinov,  we  later  learned 
that  many  of  these  reports  were  indeed  based  on  fact. 

A case  that  took  place  in  Turgay,  Kazakhstan,  in 
late  June  1979  provides  a typical  example.  An  uniden- 
tified object  was  seen  by  military  personnel  there,  who 
reported  it  publicly.  There  was  a children’s  holiday 
camp  nearby,  and  several  campers  saw  from  five  to 
eight  dark  beings  chasing  them.  As  in  the  Voronezh 
case,  the  beings  were  described  as  very  tall.  The  chil- 
dren estimated  their  height  at  over  ten  feet,  but  a 
teacher  who  had  also  witnessed  the  incident  gave  a 
more  modest  figure,  closer  to  eight  feet.  She  was  only 
forty-five  feet  away  from  the  beings  and  described 
them  as  having  three  fingers  and  no  thumb.  Imprints 
on  the  ground  were  found,  measuring  about  three  feet 
in  diameter. 

Another  case,  on  February  13,  1989,  involved  So- 
viet pilots  flying  near  Yerenin.  What  they  saw  in  the 
sky  near  them  was  a large  dark  blue  dirigiblelike  ob- 
ject with  windows,  reminiscent  of  the  classic  Ameri- 
can case  reported  by  airline  pilots  Chiles  and  Whitted. 

Before  we  left  the  exhibition  we  were  able  to  ex- 
amine a fragment  of  the  object  that  had  crashed  at 


127 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Dalnegorsk  on  January  29,  1986.  That  examination, 
although  obviously  cursory  and  informal,  reinforced 
my  impression  that  the  object  in  question  was  an  or- 
dinary piece  of  human  technology,  although  it  cer- 
tainly was  intriguing.  It  contained  lead  and  also  some 
metallic-looking  parts,  which  we  were  told  resisted 
corrosion  when  exposed  to  acids.  We  could  also  see 
glass  fibers  with  fine  gold  wiring,  but  none  of  that 
warranted  a conclusion  that  we  were  dealing  with  an 
object  manufactured  by  a higher  intelligence,  as  our 
Soviet  friends  conceded. 

There  was  quite  a crowd  at  the  UFO  exhibit,  and 
we  met  several  people  who  came  to  us  spontaneously 
with  stories  of  their  own  as  soon  as  they  realized  we 
were  from  the  West.  One  man  told  us  that  in  1957, 
in  New  Earth  (Novaya  Zemtya),  two  men  vanished 
under  strange  conditions  and  an  object  was  seen  tak- 
ing off.  The  military  looked  for  them  without  success. 
We  were  also  told  that  the  Institute  for  Space  Re- 
search of  the  Soviet  Ministry  of  Defense  was  quietly 
conducting  its  own  active  studies  into  UFO  phenom- 
ena. 

It  is  said  that  one  chapter  of  a 1987  book  by  Pu- 
gatsch  ( The  Sky  Without  Mystery)  was  censored  because 
it  mentioned  a military  case.  In  that  incident  a pilot 
managed  to  land  after  a midair  collision  with  a UFO. 
One  wing  and  a piece  of  a stabilizer  had  been  dam- 
aged by  a red  spherical  object  fifteen  feet  in  diameter, 
which  actually  circled  the  aircraft.  The  year  of  the 
encounter  was  1978. 

An  even  more  dramatic  case  occurred  at  4:10  a.m. 
on  September  7,  1984,  in  Minsk.  Two  military  pilots 
saw  an  object  that  hit  them  with  a beam  of  light. 
One  of  the  pilots  died;  the  other  managed  to  land  the 


128 


UNDERGROUND:  CONVERSATIONS  AROUND  A BOTTLE  OF  VODKA 


plane,  although  he  had  also  suffered  physiological  ef- 
fects from  the  light. 

When  we  came  out  of  the  park  our  friends  showed 
us  a tall  metallic  structure.  “Do  you  see  this  tower?” 
they  asked.  “It  is  a television  antenna  that  broadcasts 
programs  over  the  whole  Moscow  area.  In  August 
1974  an  unidentified  object  flew  over  it,  and  all  tele- 
vision shows  stopped  for  twelve  minutes.  Such  things 
cannot  be  kept  secret  forever.” 

The  case  had  never  been  published,  never  written 
about  anywhere.  Yet  everybody  knew  about  it. 

As  we  drove  back  into  the  city,  I remembered  La- 
rissa’s comment  from  the  previous  night,  when  we  had 
raised  the  last  glass  of  vodka  in  her  book-filled  apart- 
ment: “Don’t  be  surprised  if  so  much  knowledge  con- 
tinues to  thrive  underground  here.  After  all,  invisible 
colleges  are  second  nature  to  us.” 


129 


CHAPTER  12 


THE  SECRET 
CHRONICLES 


On  November  30,  1964,  at  1500  hours  universal  time 
an  unusual  celestial  object  was  observed  at  the  Shema- 
khinsky  Astrophysical  Observatory  of  the  Academy  of 
Sciences  of  Azerbaijan.  . . . 

Astronomers  M.  Gadzhiyes  and  K.  Gusev 

On  the  evening  of  October  18,  1967,  while  it  was  still 
twilight,  I went  out  on  Pravda  Street  in  Rostov-on-Don 
and  I saw  an  object  overhead.  It  was  shaped  like  a disk 
or  a sphere.  S.  A.  Alferov, 

dean  of  the  Rostov  Manufacturing  Institute 
of  Agricultural  Machinery 


Russia  has  been  a secret  country,  closed  to  the  rest 
of  humanity,  for  as  long  as  the  world  remembers.  Pol- 
itics is  not  the  only  factor  here.  Moscow  was  already 
an  enigma  when  the  tsars  lived  in  the  Kremlin.  The 
sheer  size  of  the  continent,  its  dreadfully  cold  climate, 
its  primitive  communications  network,  and  the  com- 
plexity of  the  various  dialects  contributed  to  making 
the  country  a mystery  even  before  the  communist  re- 


130 


THE  SECRET  CHRONICLES 


gime  imposed  rigid  rules  of  secrecy  on  every  aspect  of 
its  life. 

The  language  itself  poses  a formidable  barrier  to  the 
visitor.  Nothing  can  be  said  simply  in  Russian.  While 
anyone  can  learn  to  say  hi,  the  most  common  form  of 
greeting  in  America,  there  is  no  alternative  word  to  the 
formal  Strazdvoistsie  exchanged  by  the  Russians.  Even 
more  frustrating  is  the  fact  that  no  two  people  seem  to 
pronounce  it  the  same  way.  After  a few  days  in  Moscow 
I shortened  it  to  Z trasditsi,  which  most  folks  seemed  to 
understand,  but  I never  found  out  whether  I had  actu- 
ally mastered  another  Russian  word  or  whether  my 
friends  had  simply  adapted  to  my  mistakes,  politely  for- 
going earlier  attempts  to  correct  me. 

THE  SLIGHTEST 
WHISPER  CAN  BE  HEARD 

It  is  an  intriguing  paradox  that  parapsychology  and 
the  study  of  UFOs  have  flourished  in  the  Soviet  Union 
precisely  because  of  censorship.  Secrecy  was  so  prev- 
alent that  alternative  underground  methods  of  com- 
munication had  to  be  developed  by  those  engaged  in 
scientific  research  and  by  the  intelligentsia  in  general. 
It  was  a matter  of  physical  and  intellectual  survival 
to  create  unofficial  networks,  with  the  surprising  re- 
sult that  truly  significant  data  could  be  made  known 
through  the  underground  much  faster  than  in  the 
West,  where  everyone  is  constantly  bombarded  with 
irrelevant  noise  pumped  into  the  free  press  system  by 
affluent  public  relations  agencies. 

“I  like  working  in  Russia  because  the  slightest  whis- 
per can  be  heard  instantly,”  a reporter  friend  of  mine 
who  works  for  Sixty  Minutes  once  told  me.  “In  the 


131 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


United  States  the  greatest  story  in  the  world  will  be 
ignored  unless  it  is  backed  up  by  a professional  media 
team  and  a multimillion-dollar  advertising  budget.” 

This  uncanny  ability  to  screen  and  preserve  valu- 
able information  is  one  of  the  few  benefits  Soviet  cit- 
izens have  derived  from  the  social  system  imposed  by 
the  regime,  and  it  is  quickly  vanishing  under  glasnost. 

What  happened  to  a Russian  artist  named  Malichev 
is  an  interesting  example  of  what  we  might  call  the 
Secret  UFO  Chronicles  of  the  Soviet  Union.  His  story 
had  never  been  published  anywhere  until  Le  Figaro 
featured  his  encounters  and  his  paintings  in  the  article 
Martine  wrote  following  our  trip.  But  everyone  we 
met  in  Moscow  seemed  to  have  heard  of  it. 

THE  CASE  OF  THE  ARTIST, 

THE  GHOST,  AND  THE  THREE  UFONAUTS 

The  date  was  July  21,  1975.  Near  the  village  of  Sol- 
nechnogorsk, fifty  miles  from  Moscow,  Malichev  was  in 
the  middle  of  a pasture  quietly  painting  a landscape  on 
a beautiful  day.  Suddenly,  as  Martine  related: 

He  had  the  feeling  that  someone  was  touching  his 
shoulder.  He  turned  around  and,  to  his  amazement, 
found  himself  facing  an  object  resembling  a flying 
saucer.  In  front  of  the  craft  were  three  beings:  two 
men  and  a woman  who  spoke  to  him  telepathically. 
The  woman  seemed  to  be  the  leader  of  the  group.  The 
object  was  a disk,  nearly  forty  feet  in  diameter,  with 
three  antennas. 

The  artist  understood  the  bizarre  message  to  be: 
“You  have  a very  stable  psychological  system,  for  an 
average  man.  Do  you  want  to  fly  with  us?” 


132 


THE  SECRET  CHRONICLES 


“I  am  not  ready  for  such  a trip,”  said  Malichev, 
who  is  a solid  citizen  with  a great  deal  of  Russian 
common  sense. 

Quoting  from  Martine’s  report  on  the  case: 

The  artist  is  a man  of  about  forty,  with  blue  eyes.  He 
speaks  calmly.  As  he  shows  me  the  drawings  he  made  to 
describe  his  experience,  he  explains:  “The  woman 
climbed  on  board  and  the  object  flew  off,  changing  shapes 
several  times.  When  it  landed  again  in  the  field,  I don’t 
know  why,  but  I followed  the  beings  inside  the  craft.” 

Malichev’s  observation  is  one  of  the  cases  that  dem- 
onstrate polymorphism,  in  my  opinion  one  of  the 
principal  arguments  against  the  idea  that  UFOs  are  1 
simply  spacecraft  from  another  planet.  The  disk  di- 
vided itself  into  eight  parts  that  reunited  into  a single 
block,  turned  into  a torus,  then  a cylinder.  By  the  Q'g 
time  it  landed  it  had  once  more  assumed  the  usual 
shape  of  a garden-variety  flying  saucer. 

Malichev  remembers  being  taken  to  a planet  with 
three  moons.  At  one  point  while  he  was  on  board  the 
craft  a huge  face  looked  at  him  through  a screen.  Dur- 
ing the  forty  minutes’  duration  of  the  flight  he  also 
recalls  seeing  his  best  friend,  who  had  recently  died, 
among  the  beings  he  observed,  “as  if  in  a dream.”  He 
was  too  afraid  to  go  close  to  him.  The  entire  experi- 
ence lasted  two  hours. 

The  beings  showed  the  artist  what  they  regarded  as 
the  three  stages  of  life:  a body,  then  the  outline  of  the 
body  only,  and  finally  a single  luminous  point  in  the 
lower  abdomen. 

“Malichev  has  been  subjected  to  psychiatric  obser- 
vation and  to  psychological  analysis,”  explained  Vla- 


133 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


dimir  Azhazha,  who  has  studied  the  case.  “He  was 
hypnotized  twice.  He  was  not  drugged,  alcoholic,  or 
crazy.  During  those  two  hours  something  did  happen 
to  him,  but  what  was  it?” 

The  same  question  can  be  asked,  of  course,  about 
many  other  UFO  reports  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  else- 
where. 


THE  CASE  OF  THE 

FISHERMEN  AND  THE  BURNING  BEAMS 

When  a fiery  sphere  appeared  over  the  village  of  Ro- 
boziero  and  flew  over  the  district,  it  was  seen  by  many 
people  attracted  by  the  loud  sound  it  produced.  It 
measured  some  150  feet  in  diameter  and  emitted  two 
fiery  beams  pointing  forward  over  a distance  of  150 
feet.  It  passed  over  a lake  where  several  fishermen 
suffered  deep  burns. 

W as  that  another  example  of  the  overwrought  Rus- 
sian imagination  seeking  release  from  the  stress  of  so- 
cialism? Or  was  it  a case  of  a superheated  tabloid 
Soviet  press  trying  to  emulate  the  National  Enquirer? 
Hardly.  For  this  report,  with  all  its  details,  was  en- 
tered into  the  records  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Cyril  in 
1663,  forty  years  before  the  first  newspaper  appeared 
in  Russia.  The  actual  text  is  worth  quoting  in  detail. 

To  His  Highness  the  Archimandrite  Nikita,  to  His 
Eminence  the  Starets  Paul,  to  their  Highnesses  the 
Starets  of  the  Synod  of  St.  Cyril  Monastery,  most  Ven- 
erable lords,  salutations  from  your  humble  servant 
Ivachko  Rievskoi. 

The  farmer  Lievko  Fiedorov,  from  the  village  of 
Mys,  has  related  to  me  the  following  facts: 


134 


THE  SECRET  CHRONICLES 


On  this  Saturday  the  fifteenth  day  of  August  of  the 
year  1663,  the  faithful  from  the  district  of  Bieloziero 
had  assembled  in  great  number  in  the  church  of  the 
village  of  Roboziero.  While  they  were  inside  a great 
sound  arose  in  the  heavens  and  numerous  people  came 
out  of  God’s  house  to  watch  it  from  the  square.  There, 
Lievko  Fiedorov,  the  farmer  in  question,  was  among 
them  and  witnessed  what  follows,  which  for  him  was 
a sign  from  God. 

At  noon  a large  ball  of  fire  came  down  over  Roboz- 
iero, arriving  from  the  clearest  part  of  the  cloudless 
heavens.  It  came  from  the  direction  whence  winter 
comes  and  it  moved  toward  the  lake,  passing  over  the 
church.  The  ball  of  fire  measured  some  140  feet  from 
one  edge  to  the  other  and  over  the  same  distance, 
ahead  of  it,  two  ardent  rays  were  extended. 

That  was  not  the  end  of  the  sighting,  however,  for 
the  extraordinary  object  came  back  twice: 


Less  than  an  hour  later,  it  suddenly  reappeared  over 
the  same  lake.  It  darted  from  the  south  to  the  west 
and  it  must  have  been  1,500  feet  away  when  it  dis- 
appeared. Rut  it  came  back  again,  to  the  great  terror 
of  all  those  who  watched  it,  moving  to  the  west  and 
remaining  over  Roboziero  for  an  hour  and  a half. 

Fishermen  who  were  in  their  boat  on  the  lake,  a 
little  over  one  mile  away,  were  deeply  burned  by  the 
heat.  The  waters  of  the  lake  were  illuminated  to  their 
greatest  depth  of  thirty  feet  and  the  fish  swam  away 
toward  shore.  The  water  seemed  to  be  covered  with 
rust  under  the  reddish  light.32 

The  prudent  author  of  the  report  took  pains  to  send 
an  investigator,  as  he  concludes: 


135 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


And  I,  your  servant,  dispatched  a messenger  to  the 
priests  of  the  district  of  Bieloziero  who  confirmed  in 
• writing  that  what  was  related  did  happen  at  that  date 
and  place. 

The  modern  public  and  many  researchers  often  as- 
sume that  such  old  reports  should  be  discounted  either 
because  people  didn’t  know  how  to  keep  proper  rec- 
ords or  because  what  they  saw  must  have  been  tainted 
with  fantastic  ideas.  In  the  words  of  an  American 
ufologist,  all  that  is  “folklore  of  dubious  authentic- 
ity.” Such  arguments  are  used  to  support  the  idea  that 
the  UFO  phenomenon  is  of  recent  origin  and  follows 
the  narrow  patterns  ascribed  to  it  by  the  ufologists  in 
question.  We  have  already  seen  this  flawed  reasoning 
at  work  in  the  Voronezh  case. 

The  Roboziero  report  gives  the  lie  to  such  a hasty 
judgment.  Not  only  is  it  one  of  the  earliest  cases  on 
record  involving  beams  causing  physiological  effects, 
but  it  is  given  with  all  the  earmarks  of  careful  inves- 
tigation and  intellectual  integrity.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  the  people  involved,  including  the  author  of  the 
report,  thought  they  were  preserving  the  record  of  a 
sign  from  God.  They  were  transmitting  it  to  the  high- 
est authority  of  their  church,  and  the  penalties  for 
distortion  would  have  been  severe.  What  we  have  here 
is  a valuable  report  from  the  depth  of  tsarist  Russia, 
describing  the  UFO  phenomenon  in  its  full  glory  with 
its  most  modern  characteristics. 


THE  HARDCORE  DATA 

Now  we  come  to  the  contemporary  data.  They  are 
contained  in  files  as  extensive  and  as  well  documented 


136 


THE  SECRET  CHRONICLES 


as  the  Western  ones,  although  it  is  only  in  the  last 
twenty  years — and  at  their  own  perils — that  Soviet 
researchers  have  analyzed  them. 

The  first  scientist  who  made  an  effort  to  compile 
these  observations  was  Felix  Zigel.  The  result  was  im- 
pressive, not  only  for  the  number  but  for  the  caliber 
of  the  sightings.33 

According  to  Zigel,  on  the  morning  of  April  27, 
1961,  twenty-five  witnesses  in  the  region  of  Lake 
Onega,  northeast  of  Leningrad,  saw  a bluish  green 
oval  object  the  size  of  a jetliner  flying  east  silently  at 
very  high  speed.  It  reportedly  came  so  low  that  it 
scraped  the  ground  but  flew  up  again.  In  the  process, 
it  broke  the  ice  on  the  lake  and  left  a trench  fifty  feet 
long  and  ten  feet  deep.  Sample  pieces  of  the  ice,  when 
melted,  left  a residue  of  magnesium,  aluminum,  cal- 
cium, barium,  and  titanium. 

A strange  piece  of  metal  and  tiny  black  grains,  re- 
sistant to  acid  and  heat,  were  also  picked  up.  They 
were  composed  of  iron,  silicon,  sodium,  lithium,  ti- 
tanium, and  aluminum.  A joint  civilian-military  team 
investigated  the  incident. 

It  was  in  his  study  of  pilot  sightings  that  Zigel  ex- 
celled, however.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  stories 
involved  a test  pilot  named  Arkady  Apraksin,  who  was 
twice  forced  down  by  a UFO. 

The  first  incident  took  place  on  June  16,  1948. 
Apraksin  was  flying  a jet  at  31,000  feet  over  the  Bas- 
kuschak  region,  north  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  when  he 
saw  an  unknown  object  that  was  also  tracked  on  ra- 
dar from  the  ground.  Shaped  like  a banana,  the  object 
was  emitting  beams  of  light.  Apraksin  was  ordered  to 
force  it  down,  but  when  he  reached  a point  six  miles 
from  the  UFO  the  beams  reportedly  opened  up  like  a 


137 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


fan  and  temporarily  blinded  him  while  the  electrical 
systems  of  the  jet  failed.  He  was  able  to  glide  to  a 
lower  altitude  and  made  a crash  landing  without  ma- 
jor damage. 

Approximately  a year  later,  on  May  6,  1949,  Aprak- 
sin was  test-flying  a new  plane  when  he  encountered 
another  object  under  similar  circumstances.  This  time 
he  was  able  to  land  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga  River, 
twenty-six  miles  north  of  Saratov. 

Beams  of  light  were  also  reported  in  a case  involving 
the  crew  and  passengers  of  a test  flight  for  the  State 
Scientific  Institute  for  Civil  Aviation.  The  date  was  De- 
cember 3,  1967,  and  the  plane  was  at  2,700  feet  altitude 
in  the  region  of  Cape  Kamenny  when  an  intensely  lu- 
minous object  began  following  them.  Witnesses  saw  the 
object  for  ten  minutes  before  it  flew  away. 

Other  Soviet  cases  were  reminiscent  of  the  French 
wave  of  sightings  in  1954,  with  elongated  objects  be- 
ing observed  generating  smaller  craft. 

On  September  19,  1968,  at  8:00  p.m.,  an  astrono- 
mer named  Ludmila  S.  Tsekhanovich  saw  a bright, 
pulsating  orange  ball  over  the  town  of  Gagra,  on  the 
Black  Sea.  The  object  came  down  rapidly  and  hov- 
ered. Tsekhanovich’s  report  continues: 


About  thirty  seconds  later  a tiny  orange  ball  appeared 
and  circled  the  larger  object.  Three  more  balls  per- 
formed the  same  maneuver.  The  larger  object  became 
elongated  and  vanished.  A minute  later  there  was  a 
flash  of  light  and  all  the  objects  were  gone. 

Other  sightings  were  made  by  highly  placed  scien- 
tific experts.  For  instance,  on  July  31,  1969,  L.  I.  Ku- 
priyanov, doctor  of  technical  sciences,  was  driving 


138 


THE  SECRET  CHRONICLES 


near  Usovo  (a  small  town  near  Moscow)  with  some  of 
his  friends  at  about  8:00  p.m.  when  they  saw  two  sil- 
ver disks  flying  over  them.  All  the  cars  in  the  area 
stalled. 

The  sightings  continued  year  after  year  until  the 
sudden  increase  recorded  in  1989  attracted  interna- 
tional attention.  The  major  wave  that  affected  the 
USSR  became  a concern  to  military  authorities.  On 
March  21,  1990,  radar  stations  and  aircraft  were 
placed  on  alert  when  an  object  was  detected  in  the 
area  of  Perslavl-Zaleski  near  Moscow.  A pilot,  Lieu- 
tenant Colonel  A.  A.  Semenchenko,  saw  the  object, 
described  as  “two  flashing  white  lights,”  at  10:05  p.m. 

The  target  did  not  respond  to  the  identify-friend-or- 

foe  request.  I approached  the  target  to  a range  of 

1,500  feet.  I passed  above  the  target.  . . . 

General  Igor  Maltsev,  the  chief  of  staff  of  Soviet  Air 
Defense  Forces,  published  his  analysis  of  the  data, 
based  on  pilot  and  radar  reports  such  as  the  above. 
Observing  that  “the  UFO  hovered  above  the  ground 
and  then  flew  with  a speed  exceeding  that  of  modern 
jet  fighters  by  two  or  three  times,”  he  concluded:  “At 
the  present  time,  terrestrial  machines  could  hardly 
have  any  such  capabilities.”34 

The  secret  chronicles  of  Soviet  UFO  data  are  finally 
becoming  part  of  the  public  record.  Through  the  ef- 
forts of  research  groups  such  as  those  we  met  during 
our  trip,  a rich  harvest  of  observations  may  be  brought 
to  the  attention  of  the  world  scientific  community  in 
all  its  bewildering  diversity. 


139 


CHAPTER  13 


THE  PERM 
EXPEDITIONS 

While  walking  along  Serginskaya  Street  at  8:50  p.m.  in 
the  city  of  Perm,  my  wife,  my  son,  and  I observed  a 
strange  object  in  the  shape  of  a ring  flying  across  the 
sky.  We  observed  it  for  ten  to  fifteen  minutes.  . . . 

Witness  Y.  G.  Solovyev 
Perm,  August  5,  1967 

Tie  day  began  with  a little  crisis.  Not  only  was  there 
no  coffee  available  in  the  hotel,  but  there  was  not 
even  any  breakfast!  The  little  counter  at  the  end  of 
our  corridor  had  its  iron  curtain  drawn  shut,  and  the 
tables  were  devoid  of  customers.  It  was  hard  enough 
to  get  up  every  morning  to  face  the  cold  and  the  jet 
lag,  but  doing  it  on  an  empty  stomach  was  not  an 
attractive  prospect.  We  started  aggressively  exploring 
the  huge  building  in  search  of  food.  Downstairs  in  the 
big  lobby  we  overheard  two  burly  fellows  who  spoke 
English  with  an  American  accent,  walking  around  as 
if  they  owned  the  place.  They  had  chains  around  their 
necks  with  U.S. -style  security  badges  dangling  from 
them.  The  badges  were  labeled  kremlin.  They  looked 


140 


THE  PERM  EXPEDITIONS 


for  all  the  world  like  the  tough  guys  in  spy  movies, 
except  that  Western  spies  rarely  carry  their  identifi- 
cation in  such  obvious  manner  when  they  operate  be- 
hind the  Iron  Curtain. 

“Do  you  happen  to  know  where  one  can  get  a 
decent  breakfast  in  this  place?”  I asked  them. 

The  two  shrugged,  laughed,  argued,  and  eventu- 
ally directed  us  to  the  fourth  floor.  Sure  enough,  we 
found  a little  counter  there.  Behind  it  three  women 
were  serving  tea  and  biscuits  and  sugary  bread.  I have 
even  memorized  how  to  ask  for  butter:  maslo.  But  on 
our  way  there  we  had  another  surprise:  we  passed  an 
entire  row  of  rooms  and  offices  furnished  in  Western 
style.  The  doors  were  open  and  we  could  see  piles  of 
television  equipment,  cartons  of  food,  and  coffee  ma- 
chines that  emitted  a wonderful  odor.  We  had  just 
discovered  the  permanent  Moscow  bureau  of  ABC 
News;  their  offices  occupied  an  entire  wing  on  that 
floor. 

We  settled  down  for  breakfast,  after  which  we  met 
our  guide  Serge,  who  was  looking  everywhere  for  us. 
He  rushed  us  to  a waiting  car,  explaining  that  we  were 
late  for  our  meeting  with  the  investigator  from  Perm. 

Mining  engineer  Emil  Bachurin,  vice-president  of 
the  Perm  UFO  research  group,  turned  out  to  be  a 
solid  fellow  in  his  early  forties  with  considerable  ex- 
perience in  mineral  exploration.  He  had  come  to  Mos- 
cow to  meet  with  us,  bringing  a surprise  for  me:  a 
copy  of  his  book  Commentaries  on  “Passport  to 
Magonia.  ”35  Written  in  1988,  it  circulated  among  So- 
viet ufologists  in  samizdat  form. 

Located  in  the  Urals  nearly  a thousand  miles  east 
of  Moscow,  the  Perm  region  is  a heavily  frequented 
zone  where  UFOs,  globes  of  light,  and  weird  electri- 


141 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


cal  phenomena  have  been  reported  for  decades.  A 
dedicated  researcher  with  advanced  training  in  geol- 
ogy > Bachurin  had  taken  a scientific  approach  to  the 
systematic  analysis  of  these  cases,  no  matter  how 
strange.  And  some  of  them,  as  we  shall  see,  were  very 
strange  indeed. 

CONTACTS  AND  ABDUCTIONS 

On  the  night  of  February  6,  1989,  a fifty-two-year- 
old  woman  who  managed  a service  station  in  Perm 
saw  a bright  disk  in  the  sky.  She  had  gone  out  to  feed 
her  dog  when  she  observed  the  object  just  above  her. 
She  remembers  wishing  it  would  come  closer.  The  disk 
became  very  bright  and  everything  turned  to  confu- 
sion for  her.  All  she  could  recall  later  was  that  her 
dog  had  bitten  her,  forcing  her  to  move  under  the  roof 
overhang,  where  she  was  shielded  from  the  light. 

Under  hypnosis  a week  later,  she  stated  that  two 
tall  silhouettes  had  been  visible  in  the  intense  light, 
but  she  was  unable  to  provide  any  other  details. 

“Biolocation  techniques  were  used,”  said  Bachurin 
with  the  casual  tone  we  had  now  come  to  expect  from 
Soviet  ufologists,  who  spoke  about  their  dowsing  de- 
vice as  if  it  were  as  common— and  as  reliable— as  a 
compass  or  a voltmeter.  “We  also  measured  the  field 
with  a quartz  oscillator.  We  reconstructed  the  process 
of  the  contact.  The  beings  had  touched  the  back  of 
her  head  with  a very  cold  metallic  triangle,  blocking 
her  memory.  She  went  into  the  craft  with  them  and 
was  told  she  would  be  unable  to  remember.  Now  she 
suffers  from  migraine  headaches,  and  she  often  feels 
that  her  consciousness  is  leaving  her  body.” 

This  particular  case  launched  us  into  a debate  about 

142 


THE  PERM  EXPEDITIONS 


claims  of  abduction  and  about  their  interpretation  by 
ufologists  both  in  the  West  and  in  the  East.  About  ten 
years  ago,  American  researchers  began  taking  all 
claims  of  abduction  at  face  value,  arguing  that  they 
were  the  ultimate  proof  of  extraterrestrial  visitation. 
Although  untrained  in  psychiatry  and  in  the  formal 
use  of  hypnosis,  many  started  relying  on  revelations 
made  under  trance  to  support  their  model  of  the  phe- 
nomenon. Anyone  voicing  concern  about  such  abuse 
of  hypnosis,  as  I did,  was  attacked  with  a vehemence 
that  betrayed  considerable  inner  rage  in  these  re- 
searchers, as  well  as  an  almost  religious  passion  that 
made  intelligent  debate  impossible.  When  I chal- 
lenged the  application  of  the  same  technique  in  the 
Soviet  Union,  the  reactions  were  more  rational  and 
considerably  more  polite.  Nonetheless,  it  became  clear 
that  many  Soviet  ufologists  were  just  as  willing  as  their 
American  counterparts  to  believe  in  the  first-level  in- 
terpretation of  what  the  witnesses  were  telling  them. 

There  were  significant  differences  between  the  ap- 
proaches taken  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  United 
States,  however.  The  Soviets  knew  more  about  para- 
psychology and  were  willing  to  temper  their  conclu- 
sions. Furthermore,  they  did  not  censor  from  their 
data  base  the  observations  that  failed  to  fit  their  the- 
ory, no  matter  how  strange. 

WHEN  ALIENS  STEAL  FOOD 

In  part  of  his  manuscript,  Bachurin  comments  on  my 
observation  that  UFO  entities  often  behave  in  a way 
that  is  reminiscent  of  the  beings  of  legend,  the  fairies, 
sylphs,  elves,  and  leprechauns  of  medieval  chronicles. 
In  particular,  he  brings  up  the  point  (familiar  to  all 


143 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


folklore  students)  of  the  beings  who  take  food  from 
humans. 

The  incident  he  relates  took  place  in  the  city  of  Ul- 
yanovsk in  1986,  and  comes  from  the  files  of  the  Com- 
mission on  Anomalous  Phenomena.  The  witness  is  a 
Mr.  N.,  who  asked  that  his  name  be  withheld.  One 
morning,  when  his  wife  and  child  had  left  the  house 
and  he  was  about  to  leave  for  work  himself,  someone 
rang  the  doorbell.  Assuming  it  was  simply  his  wife 
who  had  forgotten  something,  he  opened  the  door.  He 
was  astonished  to  be  confronted  by  a man,  some  seven 
feet  tall,  wearing  silver  overalls  and  boots.  The  in- 
truder declared  he  was  an  alien  and  needed  food.  Mr. 
N.  was  so  shocked  that  without  any  questions  or  ob- 
jections he  took  his  guest  to  the  kitchen  and  started 
packing  some  groceries  for  him. 

As  he  was  now  late  for  work,  he  mentioned  this  to 
the  visitor,  who  answered  “I  understand”  in  a Russian 
spoken  with  a marked  accent,  in  a low,  hoarse  voice. 
Mr.  N.  locked  the  door  and  the  two  left  the  house 
together,  the  alleged  alien  carrying  the  groceries 
wrapped  in  old  newspapers. 

When  Mr.  N.  got  on  the  bus  that  took  him  to  work, 
the  strange  visitor  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  All  day 
long  the  witness  felt  anxious  and  disturbed.  Some- 
thing urged  him  to  return  home  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  the  feeling  became  so  strong  that  he  found  an 
excuse  to  leave  early. 

As  soon  as  he  unlocked  the  front  door,  he  ran  to  the 
kitchen,  where  he  discovered  that  the  remaining  food 
had  been  taken.  There  were  empty  paper  bags,  pack- 
ages,  and  wrappings  everywhere.  There  were  grains 
of  rice,  millet,  and  salt  in  the  cracks  in  the  floor.  The 
refrigerator  and  the  closets  were  empty.  But  if  the 


144 


THE  PERM  EXPEDITIONS 


visitor  was  the  culprit,  why  had  he  needed  to  unwrap 
everything? 

Mr.  N.  faced  another  serious  problem  when  his  wife 
came  home  and  naturally  demanded  to  know  what 
had  happened  to  their  precious  food  reserve.  At  first 
he  tried  to  make  up  a story,  but  he  soon  had  to  talk 
about  the  visitor  in  silver  boots.  Understandably,  his 
wife  thought  the  whole  episode  was  absurd.  A terrible 
scandal  followed  and  the  couple  came  close  to  a di- 
vorce, a situation  that  is  common  in  the  aftermath  of 
close  encounters. 


PSYCHIC  PHENOMENA 

Our  discussion  with  Emil  Bachurin  next  turned  to  the 
subject  of  his  own  observations. 

“My  experiences  began  in  April  1986,”  Bachurin 
told  us.  “I  had  been  preparing  an  expedition  into  the 
zone  where  the  sightings  were  most  heavily  concen- 
trated. People  were  seeing  small  globes  of  light,  a few 
inches  to  a few  feet  in  diameter,  as  well  as  larger  craft. 
There  was  considerable  speculation  that  a terrestrial 
base  existed  in  the  region.” 

Several  such  expeditions  have  been  organized  in  the 
remote,  forested  area  near  Perm,  we  learned  in  the 
course  of  the  conversation.  They  were  conducted  by 
a dozen  different  groups  coming  from  all  over  the 
country.  The  results  were  uneven,  Bachurin  told  us 
with  frankness.  Some  groups  saw  nothing  and  went 
away  disappointed.  Others  brought  back  extraordi- 
nary stories  and  even  some  puzzling  photographs.  As 
early  as  October  1983,  Bachurin  had  spent  two  nights 
in  the  taiga  at  a spot  where  snow  had  been  melted  by 
an  alleged  UFO  nearly  two  hundred  feet  in  diameter. 


145 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


on  the  borderline  of  the  Perm  and  Sverdlovsk  prov- 
inces. In  December  1986,  his  group  presented  a report 
on  medical  examination  of  close  encounter  witnesses, 
including  changes  in  their  blood  pressure. 

“The  first  contact  I had  was  very  negative,”  Bachu- 
rin went  on. 

“What  did  you  see?”  asked  Martine,  intent  on  pur- 
suing an  interview  with  someone  who  claimed  to  have 
seen  the  beings  themselves. 

“I  met  two  humanoids  near  my  house,”  he  an- 
swered matter-of-factly.  “The  information  I received 
was  that  I must  stop  my  research  and  disband  the 
expedition.” 

“What  did  they  look  like?  Can  you  give  us  a pic- 
ture?” 

Bachurin  took  the  notebook  I offered  him  and  pro- 
duced a sketch  of  the  humanoids,  explaining  as  he 
drew.  “They  had  gray  eyes,  only  slightly  larger  than 
human  eyes.  They  were  about  five  feet  tall  and  wore 
caps  and  a jacket  with  a zipper  in  front.  They  had 
short  gray  hair.  Their  hands  reached  below  their 
knees.” 

“How  many  fingers?” 

“They  had  normal  hands  with  five  fingers.”  And 
then  he  added  as  an  afterthought:  “They  also  had 
some  scars  on  their  hands.” 

Well,  I thought,  here  is  another  case  the  American 
abductionists  would  quickly  sweep  under  the  carpet 
for  fear  of  tainting  their  fine  database  of  dwarfish, 
bald  entities  with  huge  black  eyes. 

How  did  you  know  they  weren’t  simply  human 
beings  with  abnormally  long  arms?” 

Bachurin  did  not  take  offense  at  the  inquisitive  tone 
of  our  probing  questions.  “One  of  them  followed  me,” 


146 


THE  PERM  EXPEDITIONS 


he  answered  with  a shrug.  “Evidently  he  had  been  in 
the  street  for  a long  time.  I felt  the  psychic  intensity 
that  emanated  from  him.  I made  a strong  effort  to 
hide  my  own  thoughts.  All  of  us  in  the  expedition  had 
trained  ourselves  in  psychotronics.  Eventually  I took 
the  bus,  and  the  being  in  question  stayed  behind.  But 
there  were  other  manifestations.  Poltergeists  started 
around  the  house.  Electrical  systems  blew  up;  there 
were  short  circuits  and  other  problems.  Some  light 
bulbs  had  to  be  replaced  several  times  a day.  The 
transformer  of  the  television  set  burned  out  at  a time 
when  the  device  was  not  even  plugged  in.” 

Bachurin  lit  a cigarette  and  went  on.  “The  same 
day  that  I saw  this  being  there  were  several  bizarre 
events.  The  bus  I had  taken  broke  down.  We  were 
transferred  to  another  vehicle  that  got  into  an  acci- 
dent, so  that  I ended  up  going  to  work  on  foot!  It  was 
like  a nightmare.  Then,  in  the  evening,  I was  nearly 
hit  by  a car  that  started  rolling  down  the  hill  by  itself 
and  ended  up  in  someone’s  backyard.  The  driver  ran 
after  it.  I spoke  with  the  man.  He  swore  that  the 
handbrake  had  been  on  and  the  doors  were  locked.” 

“Was  there  any  time  interval  for  which  you  had  no 
recollection  that  day?” 

“No.  I got  to  work  on  time  and  my  memory  of  the 
day  is  fine,  but  there  is  another  case  when  my  recol- 
lection of  events  may  have  been  tampered  with.  It 
happened  in  June  1987.  Around  that  time  I had  a lot 
of  problems  with  the  phone  whenever  I tried  to  call 
other  UFO  researchers,  either  no  dial  tone  or  just  a 
lot  of  noise  on  the  line.  Then  someone,  a neighbor  of 
mine,  saw  a strange  being  in  the  garden  behind  my 
house.  I was  not  home  at  the  time.  The  being  looked 
like  it  was  dressed  in  a diving  suit.  The  neighbor  called 


147 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


my  wife  and  asked,  ‘When  did  Emil  decide  to  become 
a frogman?’  The  being  had  a skintight  outfit  and  a 
helmet.  Our  house  is  less  than  three  quarters  of  a mile 
away  from  the  river,  but  there  was  no  reason  for 
someone  with  a diving  suit  to  be  there.” 

“What  kind  of  investigation  was  done?” 

“We  used  biolocation  and  found  an  anomaly  at  that 
spot,  but  hypnosis  of  my  neighbor  led  nowhere.  He 
simply  remembered  seeing  the  frogman  in  my  garden. 
The  whole  episode  was  absurd,  yet  it  happened.  And 
that  is  typical  of  the  sightings  in  the  Perm  region.” 

The  kind  of  absurdity  to  which  Bachurin  referred 
has  been  a characteristic  of  the  phenomenon  for  a long 
time.  French  researcher  Aime  Michel  first  noticed  it 
during  the  1954  wave  in  France,  when  he  spoke  of  “a 
festival  of  absurdities.” 


THE  BLACK  HAND  MYSTERY 

In  Commentaries  on  “Passport  to  Magonia,  ” Bachurin 
returns  to  the  topic  of  abductions  several  times.  One 
of  the  most  remarkable  episodes  has  to  do  with  an 
incident  in  which  the  abducting  entity  remained 
largely  invisible,  except  for  its  arms,  which  looked  hu- 
<J  man  and  were  black. 

Readers  of  Magonia  and  of  my  recent  book  Dimen- 
sions may  recall  an  encounter  that  happened  on  the 
banks  of  the  Loire  River  in  1950,  in  which  a young 
woman  was  grabbed  by  two  black  hands  that  came 
literally  out  of  thin  air  and  dragged  her  through  fields 
and  bushes,  eventually  dropping  her.  She  staggered  to 
a police  station,  where  her  injuries  (consisting  mainly 
of  cuts  and  bruises  and  understandable  shock)  were 
verified. 


148 


THE  PERM  EXPEDITIONS 


The  case  was  first  published  in  the  journal  Lu- 
mieres  dans  la  Nuit  in  January  1967.  It  was  later 
picked  up  in  an  article  by  Gordon  Creighton  in  the 
February  1978  issue  of  the  British  journal  Flying  Sau- 
cer Review  titled  “A  French  Parallel  to  the  Vila  Velha 
Attempted  Abduction.” 

I have  often  discussed  the  case  with  Gordon 
Creighton,  and  we  both  remarked  that  it  seemed  to 
represent  an  exception  in  the  patterns  of  reported  ab- 
ductions. Now  Emil  Bachurin  has  given  us  yet  an- 
other such  exception. 

The  incident  happened  in  a remote  part  of  the 
woods  in  Gorky  Province  and  was  related  to  Bachurin 
by  V.  V.  Proshin,  a member  of  the  local  section  of  the 
Commission  on  Anomalous  Phenomena.  The  case 
concerned  the  daughter  of  a forester  who,  one  warm 
summer  evening,  was  quietly  sitting  on  a windowsill, 
with  her  back  to  the  open  window.  Suddenly,  two 
black  hands  grabbed  her  waist  and  tried  to  drag  her 
out  the  open  window.  The  girl  shouted  in  fear  and 
managed  to  hold  on  to  the  window  frame.  She  turned 
her  head  and  looked  back.  She  saw  that  she  was  held 
by  “arms  alone”  that  became  “vague,  diffuse”  in  the 
places  where  they  were  supposed  to  be  attached  to  the 
body. 

It  was  still  fairly  light.  In  the  yard,  the  dog  howled 
wildly  and  rushed  toward  the  window. 

The  hands  let  go  of  the  girl,  and  she  nearly  fainted. 
Her  father,  who  had  been  alerted  by  her  screams,  ran 
outside  with  his  gun  in  his  hand.  The  dog  was  barking 
at  empty  space  in  front  of  the  window.  There  was  no 
one  in  sight. 

This  extraordinary  Soviet  sighting,  which  corrobo- 
rates the  1950  Loire  River  incident,  sent  me  back  on 


149 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


a search  of  older  records.  I found  yet  another  “black 
hand  case,  this  time  in  a rare  book  of  demonology 
^ published  in  1854  entitled  Moeurs  et  Pratiques  des 
Demons  ou  des  Esprits  Visiteurs  by  Gougenot  des 
Mousseaux.  Describing  a series  of  unexplained  mani- 
festations that  took  place  in  Cideville,  Normandy, 
circa  1850,  the  author  relates  a number  of  apparent 
encounters  with  invisible  entities.  He  wrote,  “One  day 
one  of  the  two  children  sees  a black  hand  that  comes 
close  to  him  and  strikes  him.” 

Such  incidents,  in  my  view,  throw  a completely 
new  light  on  the  abduction  reports  that  have  too  long 
been  treated  in  a purely  extraterrestrial  context. 

GLOBES  OF  LIGHT  AMD  EMERGY  FIELDS 

The  various  expeditions  that  attempted  to  clarify  and 
document  the  Perm  observations  have  brought  back 
no  proof,  but  they  did  generate  interesting  reports  and 
a few  photographs  deserving  of  analysis.  We  reviewed 
this  data  with  Emil  Bachurin  and  Alexis  Konin,  a No- 
vosti  journalist  who  had  taken  a personal  interest  in 
the  region  and  who  had  been  a member  of  a recent 
winter  expedition  there. 

Some  of  the  photographs  (reproduced  in  the  picture 
section  of  this  book)  show  small  spheres  of  light  hov- 
ering a few  feet  off  the  ground.  We  wondered  if  these 
phenomena  could  be  explained  as  photographic  arti- 
facts, especially  in  view  of  the  extreme  cold  that  was 
in  evidence  at  the  time. 

F reezing  weather  produces  a whole  range  of  effects 
V on  emulsions,  from  condensation  to  small  tears  of  the 
film.  We  were  assured  that  precautions  had  been 
taken  against  such  effects  and  that  witnesses  at  the  site 


150 


THE  PERM  EXPEDITIONS 


had  actually  seen  the  globes  of  light  when  the  pictures 
were  taken,  so  for  the  time  being  they  have  to  be  re- 
garded as  unexplained. 

In  other  cases,  the  phenomena  were  indeed  easy  to 
identify.  For  instance,  we  were  shown  pictures  of  al- 
leged “energy  fields”  that  were  clearly  related  to  a fine 
but  ordinary  display  of  the  northern  lights.  The  Perm 
region  is  located  far  enough  to  the  north  for  the  au- 
rora borealis  to  be  a common  sight,  one  with  which  I 
would  have  expected  the  Soviet  ufologists  to  be  com- 
pletely familiar.36  To  the  trained  eye,  one  of  these  pic- 
tures showed  the  Big  Dipper  with  star  trails  clearly 
indicating  a time  exposure,  with  a typical  auroral  pat- 
tern below. 

Are  the  globes  of  light  seen  in  Perm  evidence  of  an 
undiscovered  natural  effect  rather  than  a manifesta- 
tion of  an  intelligence?  Some  researchers  in  the  West, 
notably  U.S.  geologist  Dr.  John  Derr  and  British  au- 
thor Paul  Devereux,  have  argued  that  physical  stresses 
within  the  earth  could  generate  luminous  objects  that 
might  be  mistaken  for  UFOs.  Devereux  even  went  be- 
yond this  hypothesis  when  he  suggested  that  “earth 
lights,”  as  he  called  them,  might  themselves  be  en- 
dowed with  a form  of  consciousness.37 

“How  long  has  this  region  been  a focus  for  such 
reports?”  I asked  Bachurin. 

“We  really  don’t  know,”  he  said.  “But  some  of  the 
recent  observations  were  made  at  the  sacred  site  of 
Moliobka,  which  an  ancient  people  already  regarded 
as  endowed  by  divine  energy.  The  Mansi  had  actually 
erected  a monument  there.”  (The  Mansi  are  a Finno- 
Ugric  people,  one  of  many  minority  groups  in  the  So- 
viet Union.)  Bachurin  added:  “I  read  in  one  of  your 
books  about  the  case  of  Maurice  Masse  in  Valensole. 


151 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


He  experienced  so  much  sleepiness  after  his  encounter 
that  he  could  not  stay  awake  for  even  four  hours. 
Well,  during  one  of  my  own  experiences  in  October 
1987,  I was  exposed  to  a peculiar  form  of  light,  about 
3:00  a.m.,  and  I fell  asleep  almost  instantly.  I had  a 
gun  in  my  hands  and  I had  just  shouted  ‘Halt!  Who 
is  there?’  when  the  light  hit  me.” 

In  the  Perm  region,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  world, 
it  is  clear  that  the  phenomenon  is  not  a new  devel- 
opment. The  challenge  before  researchers  in  both  the 
East  and  the  West  is  to  study  the  characteristics  of  the 
sightings  and  to  analyze  carefully  the  resulting  pat- 
terns. There  is  considerable  disagreement  among  sci- 
entists about  their  meaning,  as  we  would  find  out  in 
our  next  series  of  conversations. 


152 


CHAPTER  14 


THE  VIEW  FROM 
ACADEME 


One  of  my  coworkers  at  the  astronomical  observatory 
invited  me  to  watch  a UFO.  Naturally,  I didn’t  believe 
him  but,  as  he  put  it,  a witness  was  necessary  and  I 
was  it.  . . . 

We  climbed  on  the  roof  of  the  refractor  and  began  to 
look  toward  the  northwest.  At  approximately  5:15  p.m. 
in  the  area  of  Alpha  of  Corona  Borealis  a half  moon 
appeared,  moving  through  the  sky.  . . . 

Astronomer  Y.  L.  Chikanov 
Kazan,  November  7,  1967 

There  are  no  miracles.  There  is  no  reason  for  all  this 
commotion.  In  the  Soviet  Union  more  than  two  hun- 
dred artificial  earth  satellites  have  been  launched.  This 
activity  is  even  more  widely  organized  in  the  United 
States.  And  thousands  of  balloons  are  sent  up  to  deter- 
mine the  temperature  of  the  upper  atmosphere.  There 
are  no  new  phenomena. 

V.  I.  Krasovsky, 

doctor  of  physical  and  mathematical  sciences 

Moscow,  February  5,  1968 


153 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

It  was  in  a very  modern,  even  plush  meeting  room  of 
Novosti  that  we  were  formally  introduced  to  Professor 
Vladimir  Migulin,  member  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences,  who  held  the  chair  of  physical  sciences  of 
vibrations  (also  known  as  radiophysics)  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Moscow. 

A polite,  distinguished  physicist  in  his  sixties.  Pro- 
fessor Migulin  saluted  us  stiffly.  We  took  our  seats  with 
our  interpreters  in  a circle  of  leather  chairs,  while  sec- 
retaries brought  us  the  customary  tea  in  exquisite  cups 
of  fine  china.  We  drained  the  cups  as  Professor  Mig- 
ulin, who  reminded  me  of  Donald  Menzel,  proceeded 
to  explain  to  us  why  unidentified  flying  objects  could 
not  possibly  exist,  in  spite  of  numerous  sightings 
reported  by  scientists  all  over  the  country. 

EVOLUTION  OF  A DEBATE 

In  any  review  of  the  history  of  the  UFO  phenomenon 
in  the  Soviet  Union,  it  is  apparent  that  the  contro- 
versy follows  lines  that  are  a close  parallel  to  the 
evolving  situation  in  the  West.  Thus  it  should  not 
come  as  a surprise  that  most  Soviet  scientists,  like  their 
American  counterparts,  are  still  skeptical  of  the  real- 
ity of  the  phenomenon.  The  quotes  by  Artsimovich, 
Krasovsky,  and  others  that  we  have  used  in  earlier 
chapters  to  illustrate  the  debate  show  that  opposition 
to  the  study  of  UFOs  was  as  fierce  and  strident  in  the 
East  as  it  was  in  the  West.  While  it  is  generally  true 
that  those  professional  scientists  who  have  taken  the 
trouble  to  investigate  the  sightings  themselves  usually 
end  up  fascinated  by  the  phenomenon,  there  are  ex- 
ceptions to  this  rule.  Vladimir  Migulin  is  such  an  ex- 
ception, as  he  made  very  clear  to  us. 


154 


THE  VIEW  FROM  ACADEME 


“I  began  this  study  in  the  1960s  when  Alexandrov, 
the  president  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  asked  me  to 
monitor  the  reports  and  to  try  to  explain  them  within 
the  scope  of  known  physical  laws.” 

In  other  words,  Migulin’s  mission  was  close  to  that 
assigned  to  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek  by  the  U.S.  Air  Force, 
but  the  former  acted  very  discreetly  indeed.  Dr.  Hy- 
nek certainly  had  no  idea  that  he  had  such  a counter- 
part in  the  USSR,  and  to  my  knowledge  they  were 
never  in  contact.  (Hynek,  of  course,  was  aware  of  Fe- 
lix Zigel  and  Alexander  Kazantsev  after  my  visit  in 
1966.)  While  Hynek’s  views  on  the  subject  changed 
over  the  years,  Migulin  is  just  as  much  a skeptic  today 
as  he  was  at  the  beginning. 

“I  have  been  working  on  this  problem  with  Dr.  Pla- 
tov  and  with  other  specialists  of  terrestrial  magne- 
tism,” continued  Migulin.  “I  also  served  as  a deputy 
to  the  academy’s  secretary  for  physics  and  astronomy, 
who  is  one  of  the  discoverers  of  the  principle  of  the 
laser.  He  has  no  interest  in  the  UFO  phenomenon.  I 
do,  but  only  out  of  duty,  because  I have  been  assigned 
this  job.” 

That’s  an  old  story,  I reflected.  The  scientists  who 
have  been  given  an  official  mission  to  study  these 
sightings  have  generally  been  people  like  Migulin  who 
had  no  personal  motivation  to  do  the  work.  Those 
who  had  both  the  skills  and  the  passion  for  this  re- 
search were  never  given  the  means  to  pursue  it.  We 
will  never  know  what  they  might  have  discovered. 

If  the  church  had  confiscated  Galileo’s  telescope, 
turning  it  over  to  a committee  of  so-called  unbiased 
cardinals  appointed  by  the  pope,  would  the  phases  of 
Venus,  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  and  the  reality  of  sun- 
spots ever  have  been  discovered? 


155 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“The  sightings  can  be  explained  by  a variety  of 
causes,  said  Migulin.  “We  have  to  keep  in  mind  that 
the  effects,  the  reports,  are  one  thing,  and  the  phe- 
nomenon is  quite  another.  Some  of  the  effects  are 
manmade.  For  instance,  people  have  described  some 
fantastic  things  in  the  sky  in  Petrosovotsk,  near  Lake 
Onega,  north  of  Moscow;  they  saw  a large  light 
shaped  like  a medusa,  and  an  object  flying  from  south 
to  north.  Well,  it  turned  out  to  be  a secret  rocket 
launch;  the  real  explanation  had  not  been  released.” 

The  reader  may  recall  that  in  Chapter  7 we  men- 
tioned the  important  article  that  Migulin  and  Platov 
had  published  in  January  1979,  inviting  the  popula- 
tion to  report  UFO  sightings  to  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences. Clearly,  the  results  had  not  led  to  any  dramatic 
reassessment. 

Granted  that  many  of  the  reports  are  explain- 
able, I said  to  Migulin,  how  do  you  deal  with  those 
that  still  remain  unidentified?” 

That  is  a very  small  number.  Ninety  or  ninety-five 
percent  of  our  reports  are  explainable.  Of  course,  some 
of  our  scientists  disagree  with  that.  Recently  a group 
has  been  formed  around  Vlail  Kaznacheyev,  a medi- 
cal researcher  in  Siberia.  But  our  academy  considers 
this  a waste  of  time.  Kaznacheyev  believes  in  extra- 
terrestrials.” 

So  what  do  you  do  with  the  reports  that  are  not 
explainable?  Doesn’t  that  reveal  a genuine  problem?” 

Migulin  dismissed  the  question  with  a wave  of  his 
hand.  “I  don’t  deny  that  we  are  unable  to  account  for 
some  of  the  observations.  That  is  perfectly  natural. 
There  are  always  cases  where  information  is  so  obso- 
lete, insufficient,  contradictory,  confusing,  or  emo- 
tional that  we  cannot  find  the  explanation.  In  such 


156 


THE  VIEW  FROM  ACADEME 


cases  we  know  that  some  sort  of  phenomenon  has 
taken  place,  but  people  have  probably  misinterpreted 
it.  Very  often  human  imagination  is  at  the  root  of  the 
problem.  Besides,”  he  added  with  heavy  irony,  “no 
extraterrestrials  have  ever  shown  up  on  photographs.” 

Those  were  arguments  I had  not  heard  in  the  West 
for  many  years.  It  is  now  a well-demonstrated  fact 
that  the  unexplained  reports  often  contain  more  data, 
with  greater  precision  and  reliability  than  the  identi- 
fied cases.  In  fact,  that  observation  represents  the  real 
challenge  of  the  UFO  problem.  If  the  data  were  al- 
ways “obsolete,  insufficient,  contradictory,”  the  prob- 
lem would  have  gone  away  a long  time  ago. 

As  for  the  lack  of  pictures  of  extraterrestrials,  that 
represents  another  example  of  faulty  reasoning.  Why 
should  UFOs,  if  they  exist,  necessarily  be  extraterres- 
trial in  nature? 

I gathered  up  my  courage  and  challenged  the 
academician.  “You  know,  Professor  Migulin,  in  the 
Middle  Ages  people  used  to  describe  strange  and  ter- 
rible phenomena  in  the  sky,  such  as  bloody  swords 
held  by  the  hand  of  God.  We  even  have  engravings 
that  show  such  effects.  The  scientists  of  that  day  could 
well  have  argued,  as  you  do,  that  the  reports  were  too 
emotional  and  contradictory  to  be  taken  seriously.  In- 
stead they  were  open-minded  enough  to  preserve  the 
information.  If  they  had  destroyed  it  we  might  have 
missed  some  important  records  of  ancient  comets.  To- 
day we  know  that  comets  are  not  swords  held  in  the 
sky  by  the  hand  of  God,  of  course;  we  can  separate 
what  people  think  they  saw  from  the  real  phenome- 
non. Why  not  apply  the  same  open-minded  approach 
to  UFOs? 

“What  we  have  here  is  an  unexplained  phenome- 


157 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


non  of  massive  proportion.  Shouldn’t  we  try  to  docu- 
ment it  and  to  analyze  it?  The  fact  that  the  public 
and  the  believers  have  already  jumped  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  it  must  be  caused  by  extraterrestrials  may  be 
aberration,  of  course,  just  like  the  hand  of  God  hold- 
ing the  sword,  but  that  should  not  stop  us  from  doing 
our  job  as  scientists.” 

Migulin  may  have  felt  the  weight  of  these  argu- 
ments, because  he  replied  to  me  without  acrimony.  “I 
am  familiar  with  your  opinion,  and  I have  read  the 
works  of  Hynek  and  Menzel  in  this  field.  But  the  idea 
that  some  form  of  consciousness  is  manifested  by  the 
UFO  phenomenon  is  only  a hypothesis,  one  that  has 
never  been  proven.  We  cannot  expect  to  discover  any 
new  law  in  this  regard,  at  least  before  the  end  of  the 
century.” 

Up  to  that  point  our  debate,  although  tense,  had 
been  kept  cool  and  considerate,  with  the  mutual  re- 
spect that  is  customary  among  scientists.  Who  was  I 
to  give  a lesson  in  scientific  methodology  to  a Soviet 
academician,  and  in  his  own  country,  too?  For  Mig- 
ulin’s  part,  he  remained  a courteous  host,  although  it 
was  obvious  that  we  had  a fundamental  disagree- 
ment. 

But  an  unexpected  new  factor  suddenly  appeared 
in  our  group.  The  three  Novosti  interpreters  who  were 
with  us  stopped  doing  the  translation  to  jump  squarely 
into  the  debate. 

“What  about  the  cases  from  the  latest  wave?”  one 
of  them  asked  angrily.  “How  about  the  pictures  taken 
in  the  Perm  region,  in  full  daylight,  Professor?  How 
can  you  say  that  the  sightings  there  are  explainable 
by  conservative  physics,  relying  on  well-known  laws 
of  nature?” 


158 


THE  VIEW  FROM  ACADEME 


Martine  and  I watched  the  scene  with  some  amaze- 
ment. Later  we  reflected  that  it  reminded  us  of  the 
confrontations  between  French  students  and  the  older 
bosses  of  the  French  academic  structure  during  the 
turbulent  period  of  May  1968.  It  was  very  obvious 
that  Professor  Vladimir  Migulin,  holder  of  the  chair 
of  radiophysics  at  Moscow  University  and  a full  mem- 
ber of  the  prestigious  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the 
USSR,  was  not  used  to  being  pushed  around  by  a 
bunch  of  youngsters.  It  was  a new  experience  for  him 
and  he  did  not  like  it. 

“Why  won’t  scientists  study  this?”  asked  one  of  the 
Novosti  men,  spreading  photographs  over  the  table. 

“Scientists  don’t  have  anything  to  work  with  here. 
Science  can  only  operate  on  verified  facts.” 

“Have  you  discussed  this  with  Kaznacheyev?” 

“I  already  told  you:  we  think  he  is  wasting  his 
time.” 

“Have  you  looked  at  Azhazha’s  data?” 

Migulin  shrugged  and  replied.  “I’ve  known  him  for 
ten  years.  He  only  plays  a positive  role  in  this  debate 
to  the  extent  that  he  contributes  new  data.  But  his 
sources  are  not  reliable.” 

“What  about  the  observations  at  Voronezh?” 

“I  didn’t  go  there  myself,  so  I don’t  want  to  say  too 
much  about  it.  The  witnesses  make  all  sorts  of  claims 
that  sound  like  hoaxes  to  me.  These  people  may  be 
mentally  ill,  you  know.  Or  else  they  are  lying.  The 
phenomenon  they  describe  has  been  linked  to  a rocket 
launch  from  Volgograd,  on  a second-by-second  basis. 
It  has  all  been  explained.” 

The  alleged  explanation  did  not  hold,  of  course. 
There  were  numerous  low-level  observations  at  Vo- 
ronezh over  a two-week  period,  and  there  were 


159 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


ground  traces  in  the  park.  They  could  not  be  ac- 
counted for  by  simple  rocket  firings. 

The  conversation  had  taken  an  aggressive  turn.  It 
was  conducted  in  rapid  volleys  exchanged  in  Russian, 
so  that  my  record  of  it  is  woefully  incomplete.  The 
outcome  was  clear,  however:  the  argument,  predict- 
ably, had  left  everyone  on  his  position. 

It  was  Martine  who  brought  the  discussion  back  to  a 
temperate  level.  “The  other  evening,”  she  said,  “Alex- 
ander Kazantsev  told  us  of  an  object  with  a very  curious 
composition.  It  seemed  to  have  crashed  near  the  Varta 
River  in  1975.  Have  you  investigated  this  incident?” 

“I  have  heard  of  the  case,  but  I am  not  as  impressed 
with  it  as  Kazantsev  is.  I think  what  we  have  here  is 
simply  a combination  of  terrestrial  materials.” 

Martine  pressed  on  politely.  “Rut  it  seems  to  have 
been  manufactured  in  outer  space,  Professor.” 

“Perhaps  it  was,”  said  Migulin  with  a smile.  “What 
is  so  surprising  about  that?  We  are  conducting  ad- 
vanced metallurgical  experiments  in  orbit.” 

“Why  would  they  have  dropped  pieces  of  that 
metal?  Surely  it  would  be  very  valuable  if  it  was  man- 
ufactured aboard  Soyuz  or  Salyut.” 

The  academician  was  obviously  reluctant  to  answer 
the  question. 

“What  about  the  new  research  group  headed  by 
Vladimir  Azhazha?”  asked  Martine,  turning  to  a new 
topic.  “Isn’t  that  a valuable  step  in  the  study?” 

“He  doesn’t  have  a state  budget,”  said  Migulin.  “He 
hopes  to  get  some  funds,  but  for  the  moment  his  work 
is  purely  private.” 

I joined  in  at  that  point.  “What  about  the  Soviet 
military?  There  are  numerous  indications  that  they 
have  conducted  their  own  studies.” 


160 


THE  VIEW  FROM  ACADEME 


“Yes,  they  have,”  he  conceded.  “Some  fifteen  years 
ago  our  armed  forces  set  up  a research  group  that  col- 
laborated with  the  academy.  But  it  was  abolished  five 
years  later  for  lack  of  results.” 

Perhaps  I should  have  brought  up  the  Cuban  case, 
but  I had  the  distinct  feeling  that  the  debate  had  been 
pushed  as  far  as  it  could  be. 

“It  is  the  human  factor,  the  psychology  of  the  wit- 
nesses, that  plays  the  greatest  role,”  concluded  Migu- 
lin,  implying  again  that  the  unexplained  cases  were 
the  product  of  overheated  imagination.  He  added  in 
a conciliatory  way:  “We  must  continue  to  look  at  the 
problem.  We  have  to  wait  for  new  facts.” 

I changed  the  subject  again.  “During  this  trip  we 
have  heard  a lot  of  surprising  comments  about  biolo- 
cation. What  do  you  think  of  that  phenomenon?” 

I fully  expected  that  Migulin  would  treat  dowsing 
with  the  same  contempt  he  had  shown  for  UFO  data. 
In  the  West  the  American  Association  for  the  Ad- 
vancement of  Science  long  denied  membership  to  the 
very  scholarly  Parapsychological  Association  because 
it  did  research  on  such  forbidden  topics.  (The  A A AS 
only  accepted  it  in  1969.)  In  France  Professor  Yves 
Rocard,  one  of  the  most  influential  physicists  under 
Charles  de  Gaulle  and  father  of  a socialist  prime  min- 
ister, had  failed  to  be  elected  to  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences because  he  dared  to  set  up  an  experiment  to  test 
dowsing  ability  and  to  publish  the  results.  Here  again, 
however,  Migulin  had  a surprise  for  us. 

“Biolocation  must  be  seriously  studied,”  he  said 
flatly.  “I  do  not  have  a personal  hypothesis  to  explain 
it,  but  you  should  expect  some  breakthroughs  from 
the  biological  standpoint.” 

“So  you  would  agree  that  the  effect  is  real?” 


161 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


“I  don’t  deny  it.  There  are  many  such  effects  that 
cannot  be  explained  by  modern  science.  Hypnosis,  for 
instance.  Biolocation  may  belong  in  the  same  cate- 
gory. Of  course  it  is  difficult  for  science  to  study  such 
phenomena  unless  they  are  reproducible  with  good  re- 
liability.” 

“So  . . . should  we  take  your  answer  to  mean  that 
you  are  looking  for  a scientific  explanation  in  terms  of 
classical  effects?” 

Yes,  all  we  can  say  is  that  biolocation  represents 
the  interaction  of  biological  objects  with  the  environ- 
ment. Again,  I don’t  have  a personal  hypothesis  to 
offer.  We  are  studying  the  effects  of  electric  and  mag- 
netic fields  on  these  abilities.  Many  more  experiments 
are  needed.” 

Professor  Migulin  looked  at  his  watch.  We  under- 
stood that  the  interview  was  at  an  end.  Handshakes 
were  exchanged.  We  were  left  with  the  feeling  that 
the  view  from  academe  was  a very  complex  and  subtle 
one  indeed,  even  if  many  of  the  answers  given  to  the 
public  were  of  the  standard  debunking  type.  Some- 
thing was  going  on  under  the  surface;  between  the 
lines  of  our  dialogue  there  was  evidence  of  official 
concern  and  of  a powerful  controversy  ready  to  erupt. 

We  would  have  a clear  confirmation  of  it  the  very 
next  day. 


162 


CHAPTER  15 


TURNING  A PAGE 
IN  THE  BOOK  OF  SCIENCE 


The  problem  of  UFOs  has  captured  the  attention  of 
the  public  and  of  many  scientists.  For  a long  time, 
some  of  them  have  asserted  that  there  are  no  such  phe- 
nomena in  nature  and  that  reports  about  them  were 
caused  either  by  optical  illusions  or  by  careless  observa- 
tions. 

Recently,  however,  it  has  become  impossible  to  hold 
such  a view.  UFOs  continue  to  be  observed,  not  by 
chance  witnesses  who  do  not  inspire  confidence,  but  by 
professional  astronomers  and  other  scientists  and  by  pi- 
lots. 

It  serves  no  purpose  for  us  to  refrain  from  public  sci- 
entific investigations  in  this  field. 

Dr.  M.  M.  Protodyakonov, 

deputy  director  of  the  Earth  Sciences  Institute, 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences 
Major  General  G.  A.  Uger  (Ret.), 

editor  in  chief  of  Foreign  Electronics  Magazine 
L.  M.  Leonov,  writer 
V.  I.  Borbunov,  aircraft  designer 
Col.  G.  F.  Sivakov,  Air  Force  Engineering  Academy 
Dr.  Y.  V.  Ryabov, 

dean  of  the  Military  Engineering  Academy 


163 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

It  was  partially  to  repay  the  hospitality  of  our  hosts, 
and  partially  to  launch  a wider  debate  that  I hoped 
to  pursue  in  future  years,  that  I suggested  the  idea  of 
a friendly  roundtable  with  local  ufologists.  What  I 
had  in  mind  was  an  informal,  American-style  ex- 
change during  which  we  could  review  some  of  the 
theories  about  UFOs,  their  history,  the  structure  of 
the  phenomenon,  and  its  possible  meaning. 

“Very  good  idea,”  our  Novosti  friends  had  said.  “On 
Friday  we  will  organize  such  a roundtable,  as  you 
say,  with  a few  researchers  from  Moscow.  Then,  in 
the  afternoon,  why  don’t  you  plan  to  give  a more  gen- 
eral lecture  for  the  press?” 

What  they  did  not  tell  me  was  that  there  was  no 
such  thing  as  an  American-style  roundtable  in  Russia. 
Perhaps  there  had  been  a mistake  in  the  translation. 
But  our  informal  seminar,  as  it  turned  out,  would  ini- 
tiate one  of  the  more  significant  scientific  debates  I 
had  ever  attended  on  the  subject.  The  evening  lecture 
also  turned  into  a formal  symposium  in  front  of  four 
hundred  journalists.  At  the  end  of  the  day  our  under- 
standing of  the  phenomenon  in  general,  and  its  im- 
pact in  the  Soviet  Union  in  particular,  had  been 
further  shattered. 

Any  illusion  that  we  would  be  spending  the  morn- 
ing in  an  informal  exchange  was  quickly  left  behind 
when  we  entered  the  large  rectangular  room  where 
the  meeting  was  scheduled  to  take  place.  There  were 
microphones  everywhere,  booths  manned  by  interpre- 
ters at  one  end,  a bust  of  Lenin  at  the  other,  and  some 
twenty-five  participants  in  suits  and  ties  seated  at  the 
huge  conference  table,  pens  and  paper  before  them, 
tape  recorders  at  the  ready.  Vladimir  Azhazha  and  I 
were  given  seats  under  a portrait  of  Mikhail  Gor- 


164 


TURNING  A PAGE  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  SCIENCE 


bachev,  and  Vice-Chairman  Milyutenko  gave  us  a 
friendly  but  thoroughly  serious  introduction,  after 
which  we  each  had  the  floor  for  half  an  hour.  A gen- 
eral discussion  followed. 

The  tone  of  that  discussion  was  given  by  the  first 
speaker,  who  introduced  himself  as  the  head  of  an 
important  physical  laboratory  of  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences. His  interest,  predictably,  was  landing  traces. 
He  had  been  studying  them  for  many  years.  I asked 
about  recent  cases. 

“We  have  a catalog  of  thirty  landings  recorded  be- 
tween August  and  November  1989,”  he  answered,  “in 
the  single  region  of  Nicolayev  near  the  Black  Sea.  The 
folks  in  Voronezh  are  not  the  only  ones  who  have  re- 
ported such  phenomena.” 

It  was  a theme  that  would  recur  during  the  whole 
discussion:  Voronezh  was  far  from  an  isolated  inci- 
dent. It  wasn’t  even  terribly  significant.  There  were 
better  data  around.  And  they  had  been  analyzed  in 
the  field  and  in  the  laboratory  by  teams  of  scientists. 

This  was  the  story  the  Western  press  had  missed. 

Other  people  introduced  themselves  listing  their  de- 
grees, their  affiliations,  their  years  of  experience  with 
UFOs.  A new  realization  started  sinking  into  my 
mind:  it  would  not  be  easy  to  bring  together  a similar 
group  in  the  United  States,  or  in  Western  Europe. 
Many  scientists  who  once  belonged  to  specialized  UFO 
organizations  have  deserted  them  in  the  last  few  years, 
driven  away  by  dogmatic  gurus  who  tried  to  impose 
their  own  theories,  or  disgusted  by  the  pointless  fights 
between  the  abductionists  and  the  conspiracy  believ- 
ers. The  leaders  of  these  organizations  only  welcomed 
within  their  ranks  those  scientists  who  agreed  with 
them,  without  realizing  that  it  is  basic  to  the  training 


165 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


of  a real  scientist  to  challenge  all  preconceived  no- 
tions, including  his  own.  As  a result,  field  investiga- 
tions had  fallen  to  a very  low  point  in  the  West.  Why 
bother  to  analyze  traces,  to  compile  accurate  data- 
bases, or  to  look  for  patterns  if  one  could  simply  force 
the  White  House,  Congress,  the  Pentagon,  or  some 
other  group  to  reveal  the  truth  they  surely  possess? 
Why  go  through  the  hard  work  of  checking  the  ac- 
curacy of  the  reports  and  the  reliability  of  witnesses 
when  the  full  nature  of  the  phenomenon  will  surely 
be  disclosed  by  the  next  abductee  we  hypnotize? 

While  American  ufologists  fell  into  this  trap,  Soviet 
researchers  have  managed  to  avoid  it  until  now.  Per- 
haps that  is  only  a temporary  situation:  the  tempta- 
tion will  be  great  to  rush  into  the  same  sort  of  activity. 
We  have  already  seen  how  hypnosis  was  used  in  the 
USSR  in  combination  with  such  unproven  techniques 
as  biolocation.  But  the  Soviets’  passion  for  a complete 
research  framework  and  their  experience  with  para- 
psychology has  allowed  them  to  preserve  a sane  per- 
spective. 

Questions  fused  around  the  table.  Many  people  were 
curious  about  the  role  played  by  the  debunker  Donald 
Menzel.  What  about  all  the  rumors  of  a secret  study? 
Were  parapsychological  techniques  used  in  connec- 
tion with  UFO  investigations?  Were  we  aware  of  the 
religious  implications?  Were  there  ongoing  anthro- 
pological or  ethnological  studies  of  the  UFO  phenom- 
enon? Had  the  United  States  and  France  conducted 
research  on  the  microbiology  of  UFO  landing  sites  and 
if  not,  why  not?  To  some  of  these  questions  I felt  I 
could  give  adequate  answers.  Others  left  me  forced  to 
confess  ignorance.  I could  see  that  the  people  around 
the  table  were  surprised  to  hear  that  in  the  West  such 


166 


TURNING  A PAGE  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  SCIENCE 


research  was  left  to  individual  scientists  working  with 
their  own  resources. 

One  of  the  specialists  said  he  belonged  to  a scientific 
interdisciplinary  center  that  was  a technical  collective 
with  a new  methodology.  The  focus  of  the  center’s 
research  was  on  contactees  and  abductees.  The  group 
had  developed  two  complementary  techniques  to  in- 
terview and  test  them.  Researchers  were  aware  of  the 
many  pitfalls  of  hypnosis,  and  they  were  very  careful 
not  to  lead  or  influence  the  witnesses  in  any  way. 

When  I brought  up  five  arguments  I had  developed 
that  conflicted  with  the  extraterrestrial  hypothesis 
(these  arguments  have  to  do  with  the  abnormally  high 
frequency  of  close  encounters,  the  long  history  of  the 
sightings,  the  shape  and  behavior  of  the  occupants  and 
the  ability  of  the  objects  to  change  shape  dynamically), 
the  discussion  group  seemed  to  split  into  two  fac- 
tions. The  first  side  held  firmly  to  the  ETH,  arguing 
that  it  was  the  only  theory  that  could  explain  craft 
coming  from  the  sky.  One  person  said  that  he  could 
produce  counterarguments  to  all  five  of  the  points  I 
had  raised.  I told  him  truthfully  that  I would  wel- 
come such  a debate:  it’s  about  time  such  questions  be 
put  on  the  table. 

The  second  group  had  no  problem  whatsoever  with 
alternatives  to  the  extraterrestrial  theory.  They 
quoted  Konstantin  Tsiolkovsky,  pointing  out  that  the 
idea  of  multiple  dimensions  and  parallel  universes 
filled  with  consciousness  was  a valid  scientific  specu- 
lation. 

“Perhaps  the  beings  described  by  witnesses  are  an 
intermediate  lifeform  between  us  and  that  form  of 
consciousness,”  one  man  said.  “The  various  theories 
are  not  mutually  exclusive.” 


167 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


This  is  an  appropriate  place  to  pay  special  tribute 
to  Konstantin  Tsiolkovsky  (1857-1935),  a Polish  emi- 
gre to  Russia  who,  as  early  as  1920,  had  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  earth  was  being  observed  by  alien 
forms  of  intelligence  and  was  theorizing  why  they  had 
not  openly  sought  contact  with  us.  A rocket  pioneer, 
Tsiolkovsky  gave  careful  consideration  to  several  the- 
ories about  such  beings.  Remarkably,  he  did  not  re- 
strict himself  to  a nuts-and-bolts  interpretation,  even 
speculating  about  esoteric  views.  “Could  advanced 
beings  colonize  the  ethereal  plane  around  stars?”  he 
asked. 

Most  important,  notes  the  Estonian  researcher  Yuri 
Lina  in  an  unpublished  manuscript,  Tsiolkovsky  pro- 
posed the  hypothesis  that  advanced  alien  societies 
might  already  be  influencing  humanity,  in  ways  un- 
known to  us. 

Some  of  the  scientists  around  the  table  echoed  these 
views,  reminding  one  another  that  consciousness  and 
intelligence  could  take  many  forms. 

“Life  could  also  manifest  in  the  form  of  energy 
fields,”  added  another  participant. 

In  Silicon  Valley  I had  heard  the  same  speculation 
from  Dr.  Charlie  Rosen,  a pioneer  in  robotics.  “Think 
of  all  the  things  you  could  do  if  you  were  a supercon- 
ducting cloud  half  the  size  of  the  solar  system,”  Char- 
lie had  said.  “UFOs  could  be  just  the  simplest  form  of 
manifestation  for  such  an  entity,  a shape  it  might  as- 
sume to  get  our  attention!” 

The  Soviets  were  speculating  along  similar  lines. 
“There  may  be  undiscovered  forms  of  plasma  con- 
sciousness in  the  universe,”  someone  said. 

“They  could  also  have  evolved  right  here  when  the 


168 


TURNING  A PAGE  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  SCIENCE 


earth  was  still  in  a plasma  form,”  another  broke  in. 
“They  could  have  existed  on  this  planet  long  before 
mankind  appeared.” 

“We  have  always  assumed  that  human  conscious- 
ness was  the  master  force  on  earth,”  another  partici- 
pant pointed  out.  “Perhaps  the  UFO  phenomenon  will 
teach  us  that  we  were  grossly  mistaken.” 

STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS 

Whether  or  not  we  are  the  dominant  form  of  con- 
sciousness on  earth,  the  Soviets’  own  statistics  show 
conclusively  that  the  UFO  phenomenon  is  present  in 
all  regions  of  the  planet  with  an  identical  behavior. 
In  a report  published  in  1979  by  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences, time  and  space  data  were  found  to  correlate 
closely  among  Soviet  samples  and  Western  data- 
bases.38 

Using  as  a framework  the  statistics  that  Claude 
Poher  and  I had  published  in  a report  to  the  American 
Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics,  the  three 
authors  of  the  Soviet  study  found  that  half  of  all  sight- 
ings in  their  sample  lasted  between  one  and  nineteen 
minutes,  a duration  that  is  clearly  adequate  for  de- 
tailed observation.39  The  corresponding  figure  for  re- 
ports of  such  duration  was  one-third  in  the  French 
and  non-French  databases  that  Poher  and  I had  com- 
piled. Less  than  10  percent  of  the  Soviet  cases  had  a 
duration  of  less  than  ten  seconds,  while  approximately 
one  case  in  three  lasted  over  twenty  minutes.  These 
figures,  too,  showed  that  the  problem  presented  itself 
in  similar  terms  all  over  the  world. 

The  Soviet  researchers  also  verified  the  Law  of  the 


169 


FRENCH  REPORTS 


NON-FRENCH  REPORTS 
(WITHOUT  USSR) 


Fig.  8.  Distribution  of  Soviet  sightings  by  duration,  in  excel- 
lent agreement  with  published  patterns  from  Jacques  Vallee 
and  Claude  Poher. 


Times  first  noted  in  my  book  Challenge  to  Science.40 
According  to  this  pattern,  which  has  now  been  veri- 
fied in  every  major  region,  sighting  frequency  tends 
to  increase  in  the  early  evening  hours,  going  through 
a maximum  between  9:00  and  10:00  p.m.,  perhaps 
because  the  number  of  potential  witnesses  go  to  bed 
around  that  time.  What  the  actual  curve  would  look 


170 


Fig.  9.  The  Law  of  the  Times  in  the  USSR  as  compared  to  the 
author’s  database  of  non-Soviet  cases.  The  confirmation  is 
striking. 


like  if  the  population  stayed  outside  during  the  night 
is  anybody’s  guess,  of  course. 

Of  special  interest  is  the  remark  made  in  the  report  j/ 
regarding  the  objects’  changes  of  shapes,  which  we 
have  noted  earlier  as  a major  characteristic  of  the 
phenomenon.  According  to  the  Soviet  scientists: 


These  changes  include  change  of  shape  of  the  object 
(transition  from  one  shape  to  another);  separation  of 
one  object  from  another;  the  connection  of  one  object 
to  another;  “extinction”  of  a luminous  object;  gradual 
dissipation  of  an  object;  [and]  origination  of  a new 
object. 


171 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


It  is  perhaps  in  this  area  that  the  Soviet  students  of 
the  phenomenon  have  been  most  perceptive,  while 
Western  specialists  remained  obsessed  with  static 
models  that  assumed  UFOs  to  be  spacecraft  endowed 
with  such  things  as  propulsion  systems  and  a fixed 
shape.  As  the  Soviet  report  observes: 

When  such  changes  occur,  we  speak  of  several  phases 
of  forming.  In  each  phase,  the  objects  have  a stable 
shape.  Any  change  means  a transition  to  the  next 
phase.  Phases  of  the  phenomenon  can  be  distinguished 
by  other  characteristics,  for  example,  by  a change 
in  the  parameters  of  motion.  In  order  to  emphasize 
that  the  matter  has  to  do  with  changes  in  shape,  we 
call  the  corresponding  phases  “forming  phases.” 

At  this  point  I am  not  aware  of  any  similar  study 
of  shape  transitions  in  the  West.  The  Soviet  authors 
have  computed  that  in  over  three-quarters  of  their 
samples,  eyewitnesses  observed  one  forming  phase.  In 
11  percent  of  the  cases  two  phases  were  seen,  three 
phases  in  8 percent  of  the  cases,  and  more  than  three 
phases  in  3.5  percent  of  the  sample.  In  total,  the  So- 
viet catalog  contained  no  less  than  149  separate 
changes  or  transitions  affecting  the  objects. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  these  statistical  studies  pub- 
lished ten  years  ago  have  not  been  pursued  aggres- 
sively, but  the  same  critical  remark  could  be  made 
about  the  United  States.  Efforts  to  maintain  such  cat- 
alogs, even  over  a limited  geographical  area,  repre- 
sent a long-term  investment  of  time,  energy,  and 
statistical  skill  that  few  volunteer  organizations  can 
afford.  Furthermore,  the  basic  tool  of  such  a catalog, 
namely,  a good,  simple,  efficient,  and  mnemonic  clas- 


172 


TURNING  A PAGE  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  SCIENCE 


sification  system,  has  never  been  available.  A new  ef- 
fort in  this  direction  is  given  here  in  the  appendix,  but 
it  is  too  early  to  tell  if  it  can  be  applied  successfully 
to  the  Soviet  data.  As  a first  step,  I have  given  a case 
index  of  all  the  sightings  mentioned  in  this  book,  with 
the  caveat,  of  course,  that  it  constitutes  only  a very 
small  sample  of  the  overall  phenomenon  in  the  Soviet 
Union. 

Another  aspect  of  the  field  with  which  the  Soviet 
researchers  seem  perfectly  comfortable  has  to  do  with 
the  mythological,  religious,  and  anthropological 
factors.  Numerous  researchers,  like  the  scientific 
historian  Vladimir  Rubtsov  in  Kharkov  and  the 
ethnographer  Valeri  Sanarov  in  Novosibirsk,  have 
conducted  extensive  analyses  of  this  problem.  (The 
latter  is  the  author  of  an  article  entitled  “UFO  and 
Ufonauts  in  the  Light  of  Folklore”  published  in  Tech- 
nology for  Youth , no.  11,  1979.)  During  our  round- 
table discussion  several  people  brought  up  the  point 
and  asked  incisive  questions  about  studies  being  done 
in  the  West,  and  about  my  own  philosophical  posi- 
tion on  the  matter.  I had  to  admit  that,  with  few 
exceptions  (notably  in  the  very  popular  domain  of 
speculation  about  ancient  astronauts  and  possible 
reinterpretations  of  the  Bible),  our  social  scientists  had 
not  paid  much  attention  to  the  phenomenon  either  in 
its  modern  or  in  its  historical  aspect.  As  for  the  major 
UFO  civilian  research  organizations  in  the  United 
States,  they  had  increasingly  discouraged  this  line  of 
research  out  of  a narrow  policy  that  emphasized  the 
abductionist  theory  and  the  space  visitors  concept,  al- 
most in  a return  to  the  ideas  made  popular  by  Major 
Keyhoe  in  the  mid-fifties.  Some  Soviet  researchers,  of 
course,  have  also  remained  faithful  to  this  view.  But 


173 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


my  impression  was  that  the  younger  scientists  in  the 
groups  I met  were  aggressively  moving  toward  new 
hypotheses. 

When  I asked  them  why  they  were  so  interested  in 
the  UFO  phenomenon,  one  of  them  answered  very 
directly.  “We  want  to  turn  a page  in  the  book  of  sci- 
ence.” 

That  was  a very  refreshing  statement.  In  the  West 
a similar  group  would  probably  have  answered:  “We 
are  looking  for  a breakthrough  in  propulsion,”  or  “We 
see  an  opportunity  here  to  make  contact  with  extra- 
terrestrial intelligence.” 

Both  of  these  replies  are  interesting  and  very  valid 
motivations,  but  they  attack  the  data  at  the  wrong 
level.  UFOs  may  not  represent  extraterrestrial  intel- 
ligence at  all,  and  they  may  not  use  propulsion  as  we 
understand  it.  To  look  for  the  propulsion  system  in- 
side a flying  saucer  may  well  be  as  ludicrous  as  open- 
ing up  the  hood  of  a car  to  find  out  where  the  horse 
is  hidden.  But  any  solution  to  the  mystery  will  nec- 
essarily challenge  many  aspects  of  our  knowledge,  and 
indeed  it  may  turn  a page  in  the  book  of  science. 

A PHONE  CALL  FROM  VORONEZH 

Over  dinner  with  Vladimir  Azhazha  and  his  wife  in 
their  Moscow  apartment  that  night,  we  reviewed  the 
impressions  of  the  day  and  the  lessons  of  the  trip.  We 
also  had  a chance  to  discuss  in  more  detail  the  rapid 
changes  that  were  taking  place  in  the  training  and 
deployment  of  field  investigators  in  the  USSR.  Under 
Azhazha’s  leadership,  an  institute  had  been  estab- 
lished where  volunteers  could  take  a sixty-hour  cur- 
riculum covering  the  methodology  and  history  of  UFO 


174 


TURNING  A PACE  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  SCIENCE 


research.  Over  two  hundred  students  had  already 
graduated  from  the  course,  we  were  told. 

Halfway  through  dinner  the  telephone  rang  and  our 
host  excused  himself  from  the  table.  He  came  back 
with  exciting  news.  “They  were  calling  me  from  Vo- 
ronezh,” he  told  us.  “They’ve  had  another  sighting. 
The  object  projected  beams  of  light  that  melted  the 
asphalt  before  block  #5  of  the  nuclear  power  plant. 
There  were  many  witnesses.  The  Voronezh  group  took 
pieces  of  the  asphalt  for  analysis.” 

“Professor  Migulin  told  us  he  thought  the  sightings 
in  Voronezh  were  simply  mistaken  observations  of 
rocket  launches  from  Volgograd,”  I pointed  out. 

Azhazha  looked  at  me  with  surprise.  “I  am  shocked 
to  hear  he  even  suggested  such  a thing,”  he  said.  “All 
the  launches  from  Volgograd  are  toward  the  east.  But 
Voronezh  is  to  the  northwest  of  the  rocket  site.  Be- 
sides, how  could  a rocket  flying  over  Voronezh  melt 
the  asphalt  in  a parking  lot?” 

MINUS  TWENTY-SEVEN 

On  our  last  day  in  Moscow  the  outside  temperature 
was  twenty-seven  below  zero  and  still  dropping.  Our 
interpreter,  Serge,  who  drove  to  the  airport  with  us 
after  retrieving  our  precious  passports  from  the  secu- 
rity desk  at  the  Russia  Hotel,  told  us  the  weather  was 
merely  becoming  “interesting.”  The  last  photographs 
we  took  on  Red  Square  show  dark,  indistinct  silhou- 
ettes with  the  gray  blur  of  giant  buildings  in  the  back- 
ground. Serge  told  us  that  on  July  31,  1982,  six 
unidentified  spheres  had  flown  over  this  celebrated 
landmark,  and  in  late  November  1989,  Novosti  em- 
ployees themselves  had  been  able  to  watch  a bright 


175 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


cylindrical  object  in  the  sky  over  the  city  for  fifteen 
minutes. 

Our  driver  turned  on  the  radio  to  catch  the  latest 
news  bulletins.  Serge,  who  listened  intently,  suddenly 
began  to  laugh.  “Perhaps  you  should  postpone  your 
departure,  my  friends,”  he  said.  “They  have  just  found 
an  old  man  who  had  disappeared  for  three  days  in  the 
Ukraine.  He  says  that  some  alien  beings  abducted 
him!” 

Clearly,  the  Russian  wave  was  far  from  over,  I 
thought,  as  I looked  at  the  enamel  medal  representing 
Tsiolkovsky  the  organizers  of  the  meeting  had  pre- 
sented to  me  the  previous  day.  There  would  be  many 
more  cases  for  the  scientists  to  study  and  for  the  phi- 
losophers to  ponder. 


176 


CONCLUSION 


The  well-known  Russian  scientist  Konstantin  Tsiolkov- 
sky  admitted  the  possibility  that  space  and  time  were 
multidimensional.  Moreover,  he  thought  that  ethereal 
beings  could  live  in  a parallel  dimension  to  ours. 

Journalist  O.  V.  Stolyarov 
Voronezh,  October  1989 

Humanity,  without  even  suspecting  it,  has  attracted 
the  attention  of  this  intelligence  and  stopped  being  a self- 
contained  system.  Apparently  we’ve  tread  on  the  corns 
of  some  supercivilization,  and  it  has  decided  to  regulate 
our  progress  as  it  sees  fit.  Arkady  and  Boris  Strugatsky 

Definitely  Maybe,  1977 


Several  months  have  now  passed  since  we  returned 
from  Moscow.  In  our  minds  our  trip  to  the  Soviet 
Union  has  come  to  assume  the  features  of  a dream  or 
a fairy  tale.  We  vaguely  remember  the  frustration  and 
occasional  anger,  the  impossible  telephone  system,  the 
mornings  without  breakfast,  and  the  ominous  shad- 
ows in  the  corners  of  the  hotel  hallways.  Indeed,  there 
were  difficulties  to  be  overcome  at  every  turn,  but 
those  moments  of  discontent  were  overwhelmed  by 


177 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


magical  visions  of  Blessed  Basil’s  towering  bulbs  seen 
through  the  falling  snow,  the  frozen  glint  of  the  icy 
Moskova  River  by  moonlight,  and  the  hospitality  and 
friendliness  of  the  people  we  met. 

Above  all  there  was  the  intense  feeling  of  a mystery 
shared.  The  words  of  Vladimir  Azhazha  stayed  with 
me.  We  had  never  met  before.  Yet  he  had  said,  during 
the  very  first  hour  of  our  dialogue,  “It  is  as  if  you  and 
I had  been  working  together  for  the  last  ten  years.” 

Azhazha  and  his  colleagues  had  independently  no- 
ticed that  UFO  phenomena  were  polymorphic.  They 
recognized  that  this  was  one  of  the  fundamental  char- 
acteristics of  the  problem,  and  this  understanding 
placed  them  at  the  forefront  of  international  research. 
The  possibility  that  UFOs  might  be  an  indication  of 
the  existence  of  higher  physical  dimensions,  which  is 
still  regarded  as  a strange  notion  in  the  West,  has  long 
been  present  in  the  minds  of  Soviet  scientists,  as  the 
ideas  of  Konstantin  Tsiolkovsky  indicate. 

Another  important  factor  they  acknowledged  was 
the  impact  that  the  phenomenon,  in  its  historical 
form,  had  undoubtedly  had  on  religious  concepts  and 
on  social  ideas  about  space.  We  saw  evidence  of  it  in 
a movie  entitled  In  Search  of  the  Visitors  that  was 
produced  at  the  Kiev  studios  in  1988.  This  film,  cre- 
ated under  official  auspices  with  the  participation  of 
numerous  physical  and  social  scientists,  including  the 
scientific  historian  Vladimir  Rubtsov,  opened  up  a 
wide  array  of  hypotheses  before  the  public,  and  it  did 
so  in  a sober,  academic  manner  without  ever  becom- 
ing pedantic  or  boring.  We  were  told  it  had  received 
wide  exposure  throughout  the  Soviet  Union  both  in 
theatres  and  on  television.  It  was  clear  that  many 
trained  minds  were  considering  the  hypothesis  that 


178 


CONCLUSION 


phenomena  like  biblical  apparitions  or  the  Fatima  £ 
miracle  should  be  reinterpreted  within  the  mytholog- 
ical framework  of  the  UFO  phenomenon.  Such  spec- 
ulation, considered  marginal  at  best  in  the  West,  and 
discouraged  by  many  church  hierarchies,  is  becoming 
a topic  of  mainstream  research  among  Soviet  sociolo- 
gists. 

While  we  agreed  on  many  aspects  of  this  vast  field, 
there  were  others  on  which  we  had  creative  disagree- 
ments with  our  Soviet  colleagues.  For  instance,  we 
differed  with  Larissa  Kolessova  on  her  assessment  of 
astrology,  and  we  continued  to  challenge  the  authen- 
ticity of  the  UMMO  symbol  on  the  side  of  the  Voro- 
nezh object.  And  we  were  not  blind  to  the  fact  that 
many  Soviet  sightings  either  were  sorely  lacking  in 
documentation  or  came  from  unreliable  sources. 

Another  point  of  contention  among  us  was  the  im- 
portance and  usefulness  of  hypnosis  in  the  study  of 
abductees.  It  seemed  to  us  that  hypnotic  regression, 
in  many  Soviet  cases,  was  conducted  with  the  same 
lack  of  standards  and  precautions  that  characterized 
the  enthusiastic,  but  often  misguided,  American  re- 
search. Our  Soviet  friends  assured  us  that  they  were 
well  aware  of  the  pitfalls  of  hypnosis,  but  their  whole 
methodology,  in  my  opinion,  has  yet  to  be  indepen- 
dently tested.  Too  often,  they  have  simply  swallowed 
the  lies  that  abound  in  the  Western  literature  about 
such  topics  as  abductions  and  crashed  saucers,  and 
adopted  them  as  gospel  simply  because  these  stories 
came  from  the  United  States. 

The  topic  of  biolocation,  which  had  intrigued  us  so 
much  that  it  had  initially  motivated  our  trip  to  Mos- 
cow, has  remained  a tantalizing  puzzle.  It  is  not  so 
much  the  extent  to  which  dowsing  was  used  and  ap- 


179 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


plied  that  surprised  us,  as  it  is  the  high  level  of  relia- 
bility Soviet  researchers  ascribed  to  it.  In  the  multiple 
discussions  we  had  we  could  not  see  how  the  experts 
justified  such  extensive  reliance  on  this  technique, 
however  interesting  it  might  be.  Obviously,  we  still 
have  much  to  learn  in  this  area. 

Finally,  we  came  back  from  the  Soviet  Union  with 
a set  of  unanswered  questions  about  the  full  extent  of 
the  research  activity  in  official  institutions.  Several  in- 
cidents, which  are  outside  the  scope  of  this  book,  sug- 
gested that  our  presence  in  Moscow  was  regarded  as 
more  than  a simple  opportunity  for  an  exchange  of 
information  on  an  interesting  scientific  subject.  The 
high  level  at  which  we  were  greeted,  the  various  per- 
sonalities to  whom  we  were  introduced,  and  the  status 
of  some  of  the  people  who  attended  the  various  meet- 
ings were  all  indications  that  the  matter  was  receiving 
attention  far  beyond  the  academic  level. 

In  March  1990,  we  were  pleased  to  learn  that  Vla- 
dimir Azhazha  had  been  appointed  as  the  head  of  the 
new  All-Union  Inter-Industrial  Ufological  Scientific 
Research  Coordination  Center  affiliated  with  the 
Academy  of  Sciences. 

In  recent  months  the  British  journal  Flying  Saucer 
Review  has  begun  to  publish  excellent  translations  of 
current  Soviet  reports  from  the  Yaroslav  region  and 
other  areas.  UFO  sightings  are  increasingly  reported 
from  the  Ukraine  and  Siberia.  And  several  U.S.  gov- 
ernment organizations,  notably  the  Air  Force’s  For- 
eign Technology  Division  (where  Project  Blue  Book 
was  located  until  it  was  shut  down  in  1969)  and  the 
Foreign  Broadcast  Information  Service,  have  started 
issuing  accurate  and  timely  translations  of  Soviet  UFO 


180 


CONCLUSION 


reports  in  their  “Daily  SNAP”  and  in  Foreign  Press 
Note. 

These  developments  give  us  hope  that  a fruitful, 
long-term  dialogue  might  be  opening  at  last  between 
researchers  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  their  Western 
counterparts.  For  it  is  only  through  such  dialogue  that 
the  UFO  mystery  will  eventually  be  solved. 


181 


APPENDIX  1 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG 
OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


In  the  body  of  this  book  I have  highlighted  some  forty  cases 
that  were  specifically  discussed  during  my  stay  in  the  Soviet 
Union  in  1990.  However,  many  other  Soviet  UFO  inci- 
dents— such  as  the  following  events  extracted  from  Profes- 
sor Felix  Zi gel’s  works— have  found  their  way  into  the 
literature  and  deserve  to  be  mentioned,  if  only  in  summary 
form.  Those  researchers  with  an  interest  in  digging  further 
will  also  find  good  translations  of  Russian  reports  in  the 
pages  of  the  Flying  Saucer  Review,41  whose  editors  are  in 
regular  contact  with  various  Soviet  investigative  groups. 
The  selection  given  below  emphasizes  the  early  years  of  the 
phenomenon,  notably  the  1967  wave,  with  a sample  of  re- 
ports prior  to  1947. 

July  1923.  Dawn.  Sosnovka 

M.  Volosnikov,  who  was  on  a steamship  sailing  along  the 
Vyatka  river  in  the  vicinity  of  this  village,  saw  an  object 
resembling  a flying  moon.  He  followed  its  course  for  two 
or  three  minutes.  The  object  turned  to  the  right  and  dis- 
appeared. The  witnesses  compared  notes  and  concluded  it 
must  be  an  “evil  spirit.” 


182 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


Summer  1927.  Early  afternoon.  Solovyevka 
In  this  town  which  is  located  about  thirteen  miles  south  of 
Lipetsk,  I.V.  Surkov,  an  engineer,  saw  a white,  milky  disk 
in  the  northern  sky.  It  was  twice  as  large  as  the  moon, 
flying  slowly  to  the  east.  The  weather  was  hot,  with  many 
cumulus  clouds.  When  the  disk  approached  a cloud,  the 
latter  gradually  disappeared,  returning  after  it  had  passed.  (/ 
This  happened  with  every  cloud  along  the  disk’s  trajectory. 

The  observation  lasted  for  at  least  half  an  hour. 

August  1933  or  1934.  Kranye  Chet  ay 

V.N.  Bronyukov  and  other  children  were  playing  in  the 
street  when  they  saw  a “star”  moving  in  the  sky  to  the  south, 
on  an  east-west  trajectory,  with  the  approximate  speed  of 
one  of  today’s  satellites.  It  changed  course  and  flew  to  the 
northwest.  It  was  observed  for  a total  of  ten  minutes. 

September  1935.  Evening.  Moscow 

A.  Ignatveya  twice  saw  a strange  phenomenon  near  the  Pe- 
troskiy  Gate.  It  was  an  illuminated  sphere  which  flew  low 
from  north  to  south,  fast  and  silently,  on  a horizontal  tra- 
jectory. 

Summer  1938.  Early  morning.  Malakhovka  oil  station 
N.A.  Gosteva  saw  an  object  rushing  close  to  him  as  he  felt 
a light  breeze.  The  phenomenon  was  a grayish  white  cloud, 
dense  with  diffuse  outlines,  oval  in  shape,  larger  than  a ^ 
zeppelin.  The  object  emitted  a distinct  whistling  sound. 

September  1949.  At  night.  Suzdal 

A man  who  lived  in  a village  about  fifteen  miles  north  of 
Suzdal,  and  many  members  of  the  collective  farm  where 
he  worked,  saw  an  object  resembling  an  automobile  head- 
light hovering  above  the  village.  On  one  occasion  it  came 
close  to  the  ground.  Three  people,  including  G.  A.  Podoshivin, 
saw  this  phenomenon  independently  on  the  road  between 
Suzdal  and  Gavrilovo-Posadskiy.  It  was  yellowish  green, 


183 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


about  half  the  lunar  disk  in  apparent  size,  and  it  was  spin- 
ning. It  seemed  to  be  located  about  one  mile  away.  It  van- 
ished and  reappeared  several  times,  at  ten-minute  intervals. 

November  1958.  Sunset.  Otyasskiy  forest,  Sosnovskiy 
rayon 

Boris  S.  Khmyrov  saw  an  object  flying  at  high  altitude  from 
west  to  east.  As  it  approached  the  zenith  a disk  suddenly 
appeared  near  it  and  it  began  to  move  fast  in  the  opposite 
direction.  Khmyrov  saw  the  same  disk  again  over  the  next 
several  days. 

January  1959.  07:00  Tobilsk 

V.A.  Golenkov  saw  a brightly  twinkling  greenish  star  with 
l / sharp  beams  or  “rays”  radiating  from  it.  It  became  sur- 

rounded with  bright  fog,  forming  a spherical  cloud,  no 
larger  than  the  full  moon.  It  moved  with  constant  speed 
and  direction  and  it  emitted  a small  star  that  went  through 
a similar  maneuver.  The  phenomenon  lasted  twenty  min- 
utes. 

April  25,  1959.  06:00  Salizharovo  Station  near  Kalinin 
Aviation  engineer  Alexander  B.  Kadachev  and  his  father 
were  hunting  at  dawn  when  they  saw  an  elliptical  object 
with  an  aspect  ratio  of  one  third  between  its  vertical  and 
horizontal  axes.  It  was  dark,  opaque  but  not  completely 
black.  Its  lower  edge  was  purple,  perhaps  because  of  its 
illumination  by  the  rising  sun.  Its  apparent  diameter  was 
approximately  that  of  the  moon.  It  was  observed  for  several 
minutes.  The  witnesses  lost  sight  of  it  as  they  walked 
through  the  forest  but  saw  it  again  later,  hovering  higher 
in  the  sky. 

July  6,  1960.  90  minutes  after  sunset.  Teli  (Tuvinskaya 
oblast) 

A bright  disk  similar  to  the  moon  was  observed  in  the  west. 
It  moved  up  and  to  the  north  with  a speed  of  ten  degrees 
in  fifteen  minutes,  at  an  angle  of  forty- five  degrees  to  the 


184 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


horizon.  Its  diameter  increased  and  its  surface  brightness 
decreased  as  it  did  so.  The  observation  lasted  thirty  min- 
utes. A group  of  eight  people,  including  A.D.  Danilov,  se- 
nior scientist  of  the  institute  of  applied  geophysics  in 
Moscow,  saw  the  phenomenon. 

July  8,  1960.  Kamchuk  River,  27  miles  west  of  Teli 
The  same  group  of  people  involved  in  the  July  6 observa- 
tion saw  a luminous  disk  again.  It  appeared  from  behind 
some  mountains  in  the  west.  The  weather  was  clear  and 
cloudless.  The  region  is  unpopulated  taiga. 

Summer  1960.  17:00  Moscow 

Many  people,  including  a scientist  named  Golubov,  saw  a 
rectangular  yellow  object  hovering  above  the  city  in  the 
clear,  windless,  dark  blue  sky.  It  seemed  to  be  at  an  alti- 
tude of  several  miles  and  “what  held  it  there  was  com- 
pletely incomprehensible.”  It  was  observed  for  over  fifteen 
minutes. 

Mid-August  1960.  22:00  Kuybyshev 

V.N.  Govorona  was  in  a park  when  she  saw  a disk  moving 
slowly  across  the  sky.  Its  apparent  size  was  smaller  than 
that  of  the  moon. 

August  16,  1960.  23:00  Barakhudzir  River 
At  a field  camp  situated  eleven  miles  north  of  Koktal  a party 
of  geologists  (including  Nikolai  A.  Voroshilov,  geochemist, 
Yevgeniy  A.  Sizov,  geophysicist,  Nikolai  N.  Sochevanov, 
geophysicist  and  Viktor  N.  Tulin,  geologist)  saw  a luminous 
body  moving  from  north  to  south  above  the  mountains  of 
the  eastern  slope.  Its  diameter  was  1.2  times  to  1.5  times 
the  apparent  diameter  of  the  moon.  It  disappeared  behind 
one  of  the  peaks  and  reappeared  on  the  other  side  before  it 
was  hidden  from  view  again.  It  was  white  in  color  and  very 
bright,  round  with  some  vertical  elongation.  There  was  no 
trail  or  afterglow.  The  sky  was  clear  with  only  a few  clouds. 


185 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

October  1960.  23:00  Berk-Bisk,  Biyal  River 
Engineer  Y.M.  Novikov  was  with  a group  of  fifty  people 
when  they  saw  a lone  dark  cloud  in  a clear  sky.  The  cloud 
was  illuminated  by  a weak  reddish  light  and  a beam  of 
• light  slowly  emerged  from  it.  It  came  from  a solid  body 
that  separated  from  the  cloud  but  continued  to  illuminate 
it  with  its  beam.  The  phenomenon  was  observed  for  five 
minutes. 

October  26,  1962.  23:40  Tula 

Artist  Y.  Krivtsov  and  his  companions  were  returning  from 
a concert  in  Laptevo  when  they  suddenly  saw  “eight  or  ten” 
objects  flying  north  at  an  altitude  of  about  3,000  feet.  They 
were  of  large  size,  hiding  portions  of  the  night  sky.  They 
flew  horizontally  in  silence. 

March  1964.  23:00  Petropavlovsk 

Air  Force  reserve  officer  S.N.  Popov  was  with  three  other  men 
when  he  saw  two  strange  disks  moving  one  behind  the  other, 
then  re-forming  and  moving  as  a pair.  Passing  almost  over  the 
witnesses,  the  disks  emitted  an  intense  bluish  violet  light. 
When  they  were  caught  in  the  illumination  from  the  disks, 
Popov  and  his  companions  felt  oppressed,  “as  if  some  natural 
calamity  had  occurred,  a very  unpleasant  feeling  ...” 

July  27,  1964.  22:00  Ulan  Bator 

Bold  Khaserdzne,  a worker  with  the  Mongolian  Chamber 
of  Commerce,  accompanied  by  a group  of  students,  was 
travelling  in  a truck  when  they  saw  a moon-shaped  object 
rising  in  the  northwest.  It  climbed  very  rapidly  for  several 
minutes,  getting  larger  in  the  process.  It  made  a ninety- 
degree  turn  and  flew  north  along  the  horizon  for  ten  to 
fifteen  minutes.  After  that  it  went  down  and  disappeared. 

November  30,  1964.  15:00  U.T.  Shamakhinskiy 
Observatory,  Azerbaijan 

Astronomers  M.  Gadshiyev  and  K.  Gusev  saw  an  object 
moving  from  west  to  north  at  about  one  degree  per  minute. 

186 


■ 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


The  head  of  this  object  was  about  twice  the  diameter  of 
the  moon.  It  looked  like  a ring  with  a sharp  internal  edge 
and  a diffuse  outer  edge.  In  the  center  was  a star  like  object 
which  was  a point  even  when  seen  through  a telescope.  It 
left  a tail  that  was  visible  for  over  fifteen  minutes.  No  sound 
was  heard. 

August  12,  1965.  14:00  Liepaya,  Latvia 
V.  Y.  Leya,  a glider  pilot  (later  chief  engineer  on  an  avia- 
tion project)  and  several  other  pilots  saw  an  oblate  sphere, 
brilliant  white,  about  half  the  size  of  the  moon.  It  went 
through  an  arc  of  one  hundred  degrees. 

February  or  March  1966.  08:00  Saranpul 
At  a place  located  some  twelve  miles  northeast  of  Saranpul, 
at  about  4,200  feet  altitude,  geologist  I.N.  Almazov  and  his 
coworkers  observed  two  luminous  objects  practically  over- 
head against  the  background  of  a cloudless  sky.  The  first 
object  was  round,  bright,  yellow-white  in  color.  The  sec- 
ond object  resembled  the  moon  but  was  half  the  moon’s 
apparent  size.  It  became  cloudy  and  smokelike,  then 
changed  to  a bright  illuminated  disk.  On  two  occasions  this 
second  object  emitted  divergent  beams  like  those  of  a car, 
for  about  half  a minute  each  time.  Both  objects  moved  to 
the  northeast  and  disappeared  behind  a mountain. 

April  4,  1966.  Night.  Region  of  Odessa 
During  night  flights  a radar  operator  checking  his  equip- 
ment discovered  blips  moving  at  approximately  500  miles 
per  hour  at  150,000  feet,  dropping  to  90,000  feet  in  fifteen 
minutes,  then  to  75,000  feet  in  thirty  minutes,  then  to 
54,000  feet  in  forty  minutes,  after  which  the  phenom- 
enon dropped  to  ground  level.  The  data  was  confirmed 
by  a ground  radar  station  in  Tiraspol,  according  to 
N.A.  Baydukov. 

June  16,  1966.  21:45  Elista 

A detachment  of  scientists  from  the  Volgograd  oil  and  gas 


187 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


research  institute  saw  an  object  somewhat  larger  than  a 
satellite,  reddish  in  color,  moving  from  the  northeast  to  the 
southwest.  Suddenly  it  dropped  along  a helical  trajectory, 
taking  a bright  blue  color.  Something  like  an  explosion  oc- 
curred and  a bright  blue  round  cloud  formed  in  its  place. 
There  was  no  sound,  no  other  clouds  and  the  stars  were 
visible  through  the  object. 

Late  July  1966.  Midnight.  Near  Voronezh 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nikiforov  saw  a pulsating  red  disk  moving  at 

low  altitude  and  at  relatively  low  speed  for  five  minutes. 

Summer  1966.  09:00  Yuchka 

A witness  named  N.Y.  Marsov  was  bathing  in  the  Kubek 
River  when  people  called  his  attention  to  a shining  ball  in 
the  sky.  Clouds  dissipated  when  they  came  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  sphere.  It  remained  fixed  in  the  sky  for  three  hours. 

July  18,  1966.  03:00  Rechport 

Lidia  Pavlovna  Iliana,  a senior  spectroscopist  of  the  central 
laboratory  of  the  Berezovskaya  expedition,  and  a bulldozer 
operator  named  F.A.  Chesnokov,  saw  an  orange  disk  in  the 
sky.  It  was  less  bright  than  the  moon  but  comparable  to  it 
in  size.  It  was  accompanied  by  several  strange  clouds.  The 
phenomenon  was  observed  for  thirty  minutes. 

October  20,  1966.  15:00  Kherson 

Walking  back  from  the  stadium  to  the  bus  station  after  a 
volleyball  game,  V.I.  Duginov  noticed  that  all  the  people 
in  line  were  watching  something  in  the  sky.  It  was  a round 
disk  directly  overhead,  about  one  third  the  diameter  of  the 
moon.  It  had  a soft  silvery  color  and  looked  like  a pearl  or 
a bead  but  did  not  resemble  a radiosonde  or  a balloon.  It 
moved  steadily  to  the  east. 

May  11,  1967.  21:10  Near  Sheremetyevo  airport 

M.A.  Selavnya  and  his  father  were  walking  the  dogs  on  a 

sunny,  warm  evening  with  excellent  visibility  when  they 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


heard  a sound  like  a rustling  that  turned  to  a whistle  and 
a rumble  that  passed  over  as  if  coming  from  an  invisible 
flying  object. 

May  17,  1967.  02:30  Chapayevka 

I.S.  Rybak  saw  a round  spot,  about  four  times  larger  than 
the  moon,  with  a faint  luminous  appearance  like  the  Milky 
Way.  It  moved  from  west  to  east  and  was  observed  for 
thirty  minutes. 

May  17,  1967.  03:55  Ust’kamenogorsk 
An  engineer  named  T.N.  Kanshov  saw  a bright  body  twice 
as  large  as  the  moon  moving  across  the  sky  from  south  to 
north  for  over  two  minutes.  It  first  appeared  as  a flame  so 
bright  he  could  read  the  time  on  his  watch  by  its  light.  The 
night  was  quiet,  cloudless,  moonless.  The  object  had  “fiery 
arrows”  extending  parallel  to  its  sides.  It  expanded  to  three 
times  its  original  size  before  disappearing. 

May  17,  1967.  22:00  Kamyshin 

Major  Y.B.  Popov,  of  Novosibirsk,  together  with  Junior 
Lieutenant  A.S.  Nikitenko  and  several  local  residents  saw 
a cascade  of  lights  rushing  across  the  night  sky  from  the 
northeast  in  even  rows.  The  lights  were  located  on  the  sur- 
face of  a very  large  cigar-shaped  object:  the  impression  was 
that  an  ocean-going  vessel  was  flying  across  the  sky  with 
absolute  silence  at  an  altitude  of  about  0.6  mile.  It  was 
observed  for  two  or  three  minutes.  It  passed  almost  over- 
head and  took  off  into  space. 

May  17,  1967.  22:05  Bakhrushev 

By  a warm,  quiet  evening  several  witnesses  including  S.V. 
Ostrovskiy  saw  a bright  point  descending  in  the  west- 
ern sky.  It  flew  down  to  an  altitude  estimated  as  about  one 
mile,  when  it  changed  to  a horizontal  course.  At  that  point 
it  appeared  as  a dark  body  of  impressive  proportions,  with 
a compact,  well-defined  light  at  the  rear.  It  flew  off  silently 
at  less  than  200  mph,  with  a dark  orange  tail  behind  it. 


189 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Early  June  1967.  23:00  Khoper  River 
While  walking  along  the  banks  of  the  river  M.  Gavrilyuk 
and  his  wife  saw  a luminous  object  shaped  like  a half  moon. 
The  weather  was  clear  and  the  real  moon  was  shining  in 
the  sky.  The  object  moved  from  the  west  to  the  south,  pass- 
ing above  the  moon  and  accelerating  until  it  disappeared, 
leaving  a faint  trace. 

July  4,  1967.  21:15  Shakhty 

Docent  Y.  Krasuntsev  and  his  son  were  resting  near  the 
Don  River  when  they  saw  a half  moon  shaped  object.  They 
first  noticed  two  luminous  points  that  looked  like  artificial 
satellites.  They  moved  to  the  southeast,  making  no  sound. 
J A shower  of  orange  sparks  flew  out  of  one  object  and  turned 
into  a moon  shape  that  went  on  flying. 

July  8,  1967.  23:00  Volgograd 

Dr.  Boris  Dikhedeyev  and  a companion  were  talking  out- 
side when  they  saw  an  orange  object  in  the  form  of  a half 
moon.  It  moved  from  west  to  east,  leaving  a trail  that  dis- 
appeared in  the  rear  and  appeared  in  front  of  the  object  as 
it  flew  toward  the  forest.  The  moon  was  shining  and  the 
sky  was  clear. 

July  8,  1967.  21:30  Romny 

By  a quiet  evening  S.V.  Zazulya  and  his  wife  saw  an  object 
flying  from  north  to  south.  It  looked  like  an  ordinary  cloud 
but  flew  very  fast  and  above  the  few  high  fleecy  clouds  that 
were  in  the  sky. 

July  10,  1967.  23:00  Krugloye,  Shakhterskiy 
A.  A.  Podgorny  was  coming  back  from  the  movies  when  he 
saw  an  object  shaped  like  a half  moon  flying  from  south  to 
north.  Three  days  later  he  saw  the  same  phenomenon  again. 

July  16,  1967.  21:00  Kudepst 

V.N.  Chernyavski  and  his  wife,  with  N.  Ognevoy  and 
S.  Voronov,  were  close  to  the  shore  when  they  saw  a yellow- 


190 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


rose  disk-shaped  object  moving  from  west  to  east  in  the  sky 
from  the  direction  of  the  sea.  It  passed  behind  some  clouds. 
The  witness  had  the  time  to  take  a two-kopek  coin  from  his 
pocket  and  he  observed  that  the  coin  covered  the  object 
exactly  when  held  at  arm’s  length. 

July  17,  1967.  23:00  Sukhumi  (Agudzeri) 

L.V.  Antonova,  an  editor  with  the  publishing  house 
Thought,  and  T.I.  Dantseva,  fellow  of  the  Kurchatov  sci- 
entific institute,  observed  a strange  object  along  with  four 
other  people.  The  weather  was  clear  at  the  time.  The  ob- 
ject looked  like  a flat  disk  with  shining  edge,  flying  at  an 
altitude  of  some  350  feet  at  the  speed  of  a propeller  aircraft. 

July  18,  1967.  14:47  Amvrosiyevka 

Student  Y.  Divak  and  a friend  were  fishing  when  they  saw 
the  reflection  of  a strange  flying  object  in  the  water.  Look- 
ing up,  they  saw  a lusterless  craft  in  the  sky.  It  seemed  to 
affect  the  sounds  from  the  trains  and  from  the  nearby  town. 

July  31,  1967.  21:15  Privilny  farm,  Kavkazkiy 
I.  Kosov,  his  wife  and  farmer  P.I.  Marchenko  saw  a dark 
red  disk  flying  from  the  southwest  to  the  northeast.  The 
witness  had  time  to  count  to  forty-two  before  the  object 
disappeared. 

August  2,  1967.  23:30  Norwegian  Sea 
A Soviet  vessel,  the  Izhevsk,  was  sailing  west  with  Captain 
Markov,  senior  engineer  Ivanov  and  first  assistant  captain 
Bazhanin  in  the  cabin  when  the  navigator,  Sysoyev,  re- 
ported a strange  phenomenon  in  the  sky.  Going  to  the 
bridge,  they  all  saw  a white  sphere  moving  south.  Several 
minutes  later  another  bright  spot  was  seen  high  in  the  sky, 
increasing  in  size  and  emitting  bright  colors  in  which  yel- 
low was  dominant.  This  phenomenon  was  repeated  several 
times. 

August  5,  1967.  20:50  Perm 

Y.G.  Solovyev,  his  wife  and  his  son  observed  a ring-shaped 


191 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


object  flying  across  the  sky.  An  airliner  flying  at  an  altitude 
of  1,200  feet  would  have  fit  inside  this  ring.  It  was  observed 
for  over  ten  minutes  in  the  western  part  of  the  sky. 

August  8,  1967.  20:40  Kislovodsk 

An  object  shaped  like  a sharply  outlined  asymmetrical  cres- 
cent flew  over  the  mountain  astronomical  station  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences.  The  object  was  slightly  smaller  than 
the  moon,  about  twenty  minutes  of  arc,  with  a color  de- 
scribed as  reddish  by  some  observers,  yellow  for  others.  It 
flew  from  west  to  east  about  twenty  degrees  above  the  ho- 
rizon, moving  from  the  Big  Dipper  to  Cassiopeia  in  about 
thirty  seconds,  at  a uniform  speed.  The  witnesses  were  A.  A. 
Sazonov,  a specialist  in  the  ionosphere;  V.A.  Tsion  of  the 
Leningrad  Polytechnical  Institute,  and  seven  members  of  a 
biological  expedition. 

About  August  9,  1967.  15:00  Belye  Krinitsy 
Mr.  Lytkiny  and  his  wife  were  on  vacation,  resting  by  the 
shore  of  a lake,  when  they  saw  a fast-moving  oval  object. 
It  was  milky  white,  with  some  small  black  rods  arranged 
randomly  on  its  surface.  It  suddenly  moved  sharply  to  the 
right  and  up,  then  to  the  left  and  downward.  It  then  re- 
sumed its  continuous  path  toward  the  Carpathians.  A few 
minutes  later  a second  object  appeared  and  went  through 
similar  evolutions. 

August  30,  1967.  20:50  Dneprodzerzhinsk 
A round,  bright,  uniformly  illuminated  light  yellow  disk 
was  seen  describing  a wide  arc  in  the  sky.  It  disappeared 
to  the  north-northeast.  Mr.  V.M.  Chernov  saw  it  through 
binoculars  for  a while  as  it  went  behind  some  clouds  and 
reappeared,  fainter  and  looking  like  a greenish  star.  There 
was  no  sound. 

September  2,  1967.  23:35  Pechora 

Four  people,  including  physicist  Mikhail  F.  Zherebin,  saw 
a “mistiness”  in  the  north- northwestern  part  of  the  sky. 


192 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


Suddenly  it  changed  into  a clear  yellow  disk  comparable  in 
size  to  the  full  moon  (which  was  also  in  the  sky).  A yellow 
flash  occurred  and  the  disk  turned  orange.  The  phenome- 
non was  observed  for  twelve  minutes. 

September  4,  1967.  21:17  Yevpatoriya 
N.N.  Pronin,  senior  editor  with  the  Mysl  publishing  house 
in  Moscow,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  saw  a white,  crescent- 
shaped object  fly  over  from  the  northeast  to  the  southwest 
along  a straight  line  at  an  altitude  of  about  2,500  feet.  The 
object  moved  with  the  convex  part  facing  forward.  The 
weather  was  clear. 

September  9,  1967.  20:20  Donetsk 

A witness  reported  a concave  flying  object,  the  color  of 
molten  metal,  accompanied  by  a bright  “star.”  The  phe- 
nomenon moved  from  south  to  east. 

September  19,  1967.  19:40  Belgogradskaya 
A witness  named  A.  Serdyukov,  who  was  travelling  with  a 
group  of  communications  technicians,  observed  a luminous 
half-moon  rising  high  in  the  sky  directly  in  front  of  them. 
It  descended  rapidly,  leaving  a cone-shaped  tail.  The  men 
stopped  their  vehicles  to  watch  it.  After  about  forty  seconds 
the  half-moon  appeared  to  swing  in  the  sky,  becoming 
smaller  in  size,  as  its  color  turned  to  red.  It  assumed  a drop- 
like shape  and  stopped,  hanging  in  the  sky  for  a minute, 
after  which  it  seemed  to  dissolve. 

Early  October  1967.  Noon.  Sukhumi 

Engineer  V.N.  Chechyanov  and  his  coworkers  saw  a strange 
object  in  the  clear  blue  sky  for  half  an  hour.  It  hovered  for 
a while,  then  moved  along  the  shore,  rose  and  disappeared. 
A man  who  watched  it  through  binoculars  reported  that 
the  object  was  shaped  like  a triangle,  with  no  fuselage  and 
no  tail,  and  was  the  color  of  aluminum. 

October  18,  1967.  21:00  Dzhubga 

A Moscow  physician  who  was  visiting  this  town  saw  a 


193 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


bright  object  with  the  shape  of  a sphere  moving  evenly  from 
the  sea  toward  the  east.  The  crowd  attending  an  open-air 
movie  projection  witnessed  the  occurrence  as  well. 

October  18,  1967.  18:00  Pyatigorsk 

Astronomer  Z.  Kadikov,  from  Kazan  Engelgardt  observa- 
tory, saw  a bright  object  in  the  northwest.  It  was  a crescent 
with  sharp  edges  and  pointed  horns,  yellow  in  color  with  a 
pale  bluish  tail,  moving  at  about  1.5  degrees  per  second.  It 
became  smaller  as  it  flew  and  was  eventually  reduced  to  a 
point.  Finding  other  witnesses,  Kadikov  was  able  to  trian- 
gulate the  phenomenon.  He  estimated  it  may  have  been 
about  fifty  miles  above  the  earth  and  some  1,800  feet  be- 
tween the  “horns,”  flying  at  about  three  miles  per  second. 

October  25,  1967.  16:05  Otradnoy  Stanista 
Witness  N.  Savrasov,  an  advanced  geography  student,  and 
his  mother-in-law  were  able  to  observe  two  spherical  ob- 
jects flying  from  the  northwest  to  the  southeast.  The  largest 
object  was  yellowish,  cloudy.  The  smaller  one,  which 
seemed  to  be  pulling  it,  appeared  metallic. 

November  6,  1967.  Night.  Kazan 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Masgutov  saw  an  object  shaped  like  the  planet 
Saturn,  a luminous  reddish  sphere  with  a flat  ring  of  the 
same  color,  which  hovered  for  some  seven  to  ten  minutes, 
spinning  on  its  axis.  It  gradually  increased  its  speed  and 
disappeared. 

November  9,  1967.  Miass,  near  Chelyabin 
A white  cigar-shaped  object  with  some  black  dashes  at  one 
end  was  seen  moving  through  the  sky  by  I.S.  Lunyanov.  It 
was  flying  toward  Zlatoust. 

November  14,  1967.  Liepaya 

A large,  luminous  object  shaped  like  a hemisphere  hovered 
low  over  the  ground.  It  moved  away  quickly  with  a fiery 
light  that  was  painful  to  the  eye.  There  were  several  wit- 
nesses. 


194 


A PRELIMINARY  CATALOG  OF  SOVIET  UFO  SIGHTINGS 


November  15,  1967.  04:30  Sasnava 

V.  Treychis  observed  a round  object  in  the  sky  for  thirty- 
five  minutes,  twenty  degrees  above  the  northeast  horizon. 
It  seemed  to  measure  300  feet  in  diameter.  It  was  very 
bright  and  tongues  of  flame  were  visible. 

November  25,  1967.  Midnight.  Mikhaylovka 
V.  Rogov  was  listening  to  the  radio  inside  his  home  when 
a bright  green  light  called  his  attention  outside.  He  saw  an 
object  flying  at  great  speed  across  the  sky.  It  disappeared 
like  a meteor  but  it  then  reappeared  on  the  same  trajectory. 
It  was  round  and  flat,  with  bright  edges.  The  phenomenon 
lasted  ten  minutes. 


195 


APPENDIX  2 


CASE  INDEX 


Good  science  is  a science  of  measurement.  The  UFO  phe- 
nomenon cannot  be  studied  without  the  application  of  a 
systematic  classification  system,  together  with  a measure  of 
each  case’s  reliability.  Just  as  stellar  astronomy  stagnated 
until  Hertzprung  and  Russell  produced  their  classic  dia- 
gram based  on  the  color-luminosity  classification,  UFO  re- 
search cannot  get  anywhere  until  its  practitioners  recognize 
the  need  for  a solid  taxonomy  that  can  be  reliably  applied. 

The  following  index  to  Soviet  UFO  cases  uses  a complete 
classification  system  I have  proposed  in  my  earlier  book 
Confrontations.  For  clarity  the  major  concepts  of  the  sys- 
tem will  be  reviewed  here. 


ANOMALIES  AND  CLOSE  ENCOUNTERS 

In  order  to  encompass  the  full  range  of  phenomena  one 
finds  in  the  modern  literature,  it  is  important  to  acknowl- 
edge that  UFOs  are  related  in  significant  ways  to  other 
events.  It  is  the  rule,  rather  than  the  exception,  to  find  sig- 
nificant UFO  sightings  preceded  or  followed  by  anomalies, 
notably  of  the  poltergeist  variety. 

For  that  reason,  I have  found  it  useful  to  begin  with  a 
classification  of  anomalies  into  four  groups  that  parallel  Dr. 
J.  Allen  Hynek’s  close  encounter  categories: 


196 


CASE  INDEX 


AN1  are  anomalies  that  do  not  have  lasting  physical 
effects,  such  as  amorphous  lights  or  unexplained  ex- 
plosions. 

AN2  are  anomalies  with  lasting  physical  effects,  such 
as  some  poltergeist  phenomena,  apports  (objects  re- 
portedly materializing  out  of  thin  air),  and  areas  of 
flattened  grass. 

AN3  are  anomalies  with  associated  entities.  This  class 
could  include  reports  of  ghosts,  yetis,  and  other  in- 
stances of  crypto-zoology,  as  well  as  elves  and  spir- 
its. 

AN4  are  those  anomalous  reports  in  which  witnesses 
experienced  personal  interaction  with  entities  in 
the  reality  of  the  entities  themselves.  They  in- 
clude near-death  experiences,  religious  miracles 
and  visions,  and  many  cases  of  out-of-body  experi- 
ences. 

Finally,  I place  under  the  AN5  category  the  cases  of 
anomalous  injuries  or  deaths,  such  as  spontaneous 
combustion  or  unexplained  wounds.  I also  place 
here  the  cases  of  permanent  healing  often  described 
in  the  literature  of  the  paranormal. 

We  now  come  to  the  UFO  reports  themselves,  which  I 
will  divide,  following  Hynek,  into  close  encounters  and  dis- 
tant sightings. 

I see  no  reason  to  change  anything  to  the  classification 
of  close  encounters  that  is  in  current  use,  from  CE1  to  CE4, 
although  Hynek  himself  was  not  responsible  for  creating 
the  CE4  category  and  was  not  especially  happy  with  it.  In 
recent  years  the  need  has  become  acute  for  a new  category, 
CE5,  that  will  encompass  cases  of  close  encounters  in  which 
the  witnesses  have  suffered  permanent  injuries  or  other 
physiological  effects. 


197 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


AN 

ANOMALY 


FB 

FLY-BY 


MA 

MANEUVER 


CE 

CLOSE 

ENCOUNTER 


-A/VA- 

• 

f 

* \ 

% 

% 

% 

-WA- 

f 

• 

• 

-WA- 

• f 

•*  t 

Sighting 


Physical 

Effects 


Living  Reality 

Entities  Transformation 


Lasting 

Injury 


Fig.  10.  Classification  of  anomalies  related  to  UFOs. 


MANEUVERS  AND  FLYBYS 

The  distant  sightings,  in  my  view,  are  best  classified  ac- 
cording to  the  apparent  behavior  of  the  object  rather  than 
circumstances  independent  of  it,  such  as  daylight  or  night, 
or  radar  rather  than  visual  observation.  Accordingly,  I have 
found  it  useful  to  introduce  two  general  categories:  MA 
(Maneuvers)  and  FB  (Flyby).  Within  these  categories  I have 
tried  to  give  definitions  that  were  parallel  to  those  of  close 
encounters: 

MAI  gathers  those  UFO  observations  that  involve  an 
object  with  a discontinuous  trajectory  (such  as  a 
drop,  a maneuver,  or  a loop). 


198 


CASE  INDEX 


MA2  includes  those  cases  that  give  rise  to  physical  ef- 
fects in  addition  to  a discontinuous  trajectory. 

MA3  contains  the  cases  of  objects  with  discontinuous 
trajectories  when  beings  are  observed  on  board. 

MA4  covers  instances  of  maneuvers  accompanied  by 
a sense  of  transformation  of  reality  for  the  percipi- 
ent. 

MA5  is  a maneuver  as  a result  of  which  the  witnesses 
suffer  significant  injury  or  death. 

Similarly,  the  flyby  events  are  classified  into  five  cate- 
gories: 

FBI  is  a simple  sighting  of  a UFO  flying  by  in  the  sky, 
the  category  most  frequently  reported. 

FB2  is  a flyby  accompanied  by  physical  evidence. 

FB3  is  a flyby  of  an  object  accompanied  by  the  obser- 
vation of  beings  on  board. 

FB4  is  a flyby  in  which  the  witness  experienced  a 
transformation  of  his  or  her  reality  into  the  reality 
of  the  object  or  its  occupants. 

FB5  is  a flyby  as  a result  of  which  the  witnesses  would 
suffer  significant  injuries. 


THE  SVP  CREDIBILITY  RATING 

No  classification  system  is  complete  without  a method  of 
assigning  credibility  or  weight  to  an  observation.  While 
such  a procedure  is  an  integral  part  of  any  intelligence  eval- 
uation task,  UFO  researchers  have  rarely  bothered  to  apply 
it  in  support  of  their  own  work.  It  is  important  to  imple- 
ment a system  that  is  simple  enough  to  be  applied  quickly 
and  easy  enough  to  be  remembered  so  that  it  does  not  re- 
quire constant  reference  to  a manual  or  set  of  tables. 

In  my  own  work  I now  use  a three-digit  code  to  indicate 


199 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


the  weight  of  a UFO  case.  Each  of  the  three  digits  has  a 
value  from  0 to  4,  as  follows: 

first  digit:  source  reliability  (s) 

0 Unknown  source  or  unreliable  source 

1 Report  attributed  to  a known  source  of  uncali- 
brated reliability 

2 Reliable  source,  secondhand 

3 Reliable  source,  firsthand 

4 Firsthand  personal  interview  with  the  witness  by  a 
source  of  proven  reliability 

second  digit:  site  visit  (v) 

0 No  site  visit,  or  answer  unknown 

1 Site  visit  by  a casual  person  not  familiar  with  such 
phenomena 

2 Site  visit  by  persons  familiar  with  such  phenomena 

3 Site  visit  by  a reliable  investigator  with  some  expe- 
rience 

4 Site  visit  by  a skilled  analyst 

THIRD  DIGIT:  POSSIBLE  EXPLANATIONS  (p) 

0 Data  consistent  with  one  or  more  natural  causes 

1 Natural  explanation  requires  only  slight  modifica- 
tion of  the  data 

2 Natural  explanation  requires  gross  alteration  of  one 
parameter 

3 Natural  explanation  requires  gross  alteration  of  sev- 
eral parameters 

4 No  natural  explanation  possible,  given  the  evidence 


200 


INDEX  OF  CASES  CITED 


LOCATION 

TYPE 

SVP 

DATE 

TIME 

RECION 

WITNESSES 

Baskushak 

MA5 

444 

16-06-1948 

Caspian 

Apraksin 

Cabanas 

CE5 

444 

14-06-1968 

00:05 

Cuba 

Puentes 

Cabardino 

MAI 

334 

13-02-1989 

21:00 

Caucasus 

Thousands 

Cape  Kamenny 

FBI 

444 

03-12-1967 

Arctic 

Airliner 

Chekhov 

CE2 

444 

07-1977 

day 

Serpukhov 

Three  men 

Cherepovets 

MAI 

113 

24-04-1989 

22:55 

Vologda 

Veselova 

Dalnegorsk 

AN2 

441 

29-01-1986 

Siberia 

Multiple 

E renin 

FBI 

444 

13-02-1989 

Pilots 

Gagra 

MAI 

443 

19-09-1968 

20:00 

Black  Sea 

Unknown 

Kalinin 

AN3 

443 

1933 

Russia 

Zolotov 

Kiev 

CE3 

444 

04-07-1989 

18:00 

Ukraine 

Women 

Konantsevo 

CE3 

113 

06-06-1989 

Vologda 

Children 

Lake  Onega 

CE2 

444 

27-04-1961 

morng 

Leningrad 

Multiple 

Minsk 

MA5 

444 

07-09-1984 

04:10 

Bielorussia 

Pilots 

Moscow 

FBI 

332 

31-07-1982 

Russia 

Multiple 

Moscow 

MA2 

333 

08-1974 

Russia 

Multiple 

Nalchik 

CE4 

333 

11-10-1989 

18:00 

Caucasus 

Woman 

Nicolayev 

CE4 

334 

16-09-1989 

24:00 

Ukraine 

Woman 

Octobriski 

CE2 

444 

04-1967 

Bakhiri 

Perm 

AN3 

113 

Summer  89 

04:30 

Urals 

Medvedev 

Perm 

CE4 

443 

06-02-1989 

night 

Urals 

Woman 

Perm 

AN3 

443 

04-1986 

Urals 

Bachurin 

Perm 

AN3 

442 

06-1987 

Urals 

One  man 

Perslavl 

MAI 

443 

21-03-1990 

22:05 

Moscow 

Semenchen 

Roboziero 

MA5 

444 

15-08-1663 

12:00 

Bieloziero 

Fiedorov 

201 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


LOCATION 

TYPE 

SVP 

DATE 

TIME 

REGION 

WITNESSES 

Rostov/Don 

FBI 

333 

18-10-1967 

17:00 

S.  Russia 

Alferov 

Saratov 

MA2 

444 

06-05-1949 

Volga 

Apraksin 

Shamakinsky 

FBI 

444 

30-11-1964 

18:00 

Azerbaijan 

Gusev 

Shevchenko 

FBI 

113 

01-09-1989 

Caspian  Sea 

Unknown 

Solnechnogsk 

CE4 

444 

21-07-1975 

15:00 

Russia 

Malichev 

Turgay 

CE2 

333 

late  06-79 

Kazakhstan 

Multiple 

Tunguska 

AN  2 

442 

30-06-1908 

07:00 

Siberia 

Semenov 

Ulyanovsk 

AN3 

443 

1986 

morng 

Kazan 

Mr.  N. 

Usovo 

MA2 

444 

31-07-1969 

20:00 

Moscow 

Tseknovch 

Vologda 

MAI 

113 

11-06-1989 

21:20 

Vologda 

O.Lubnina 

Voronezh 

CE3 

444 

21-09-1989 

Russia 

Lukin 

Voronezh 

CE3 

444 

23-09-1989 

21:00 

Russia 

Torshin 

Voronezh 

FBI 

443 

24-09-1989 

22:30 

Russia 

Kugatov 

Voronezh 

CE3 

444 

27-09-1989 

18:30 

Russia 

Surin 

Voronezh 

FBI 

334 

27-09-1989 

19:00 

Russia 

Malveyev 

Voronezh  S. 

CE2 

444 

late  09-89 

Russia 

Polyakov 

Voronezh 

FBI 

444 

29-09-1989 

20:10 

Russia 

Yatsunov 

202 


NOTES 


1.  Associated  Press  dispatch,  8 October  1989. 

2.  Waterbury  Republican,  10  October  1989. 

3.  Hartford  Courant,  11  October  1989. 

4.  Howard  Blum,  Out  There  (New  York:  Simon  & Schus- 
ter, 1990). 

5.  Newsweek,  23  October  1989,  42. 

6.  San  Francisco  Chronicle,  10  October  1989. 

7.  Tasss  Thrill — Joking  Over  U.F.O.  Report,”  New  York 
Times,  12  October  1989. 

8.  Martine  Castello’s  article  on  the  New  Age  in  Amer- 
ica appeared  in  Figaro  Madame,  27  January  1990, 
84. 

9.  See  Jacques  Vallee’s  previous  books  on  the  subject  of 
UFO  research,  notably  his  recent  trilogy  on  alien  con- 
tact: Dimensions  (Chicago:  Contemporary  Books, 
1988),  Confrontations  (New  York:  Ballantine,  1990), 
and  Revelations  (New  York:  Ballantine,  1991). 

10.  Martine  Castello  and  Isabelle  Blanc  have  written  a 
book  about  the  UMMO  question,  La  Conspiration  des 
Etoiles  (Paris:  Laffont,  1991). 

11.  Professor  Vladimir  Azhazha  is  the  author  of  Hydro- 
nauts  (Moscow:  Znanie,  1964)  and  of  several  articles 
about  oceanography,  notably  “New  Achievements  in 
the  Field  of  Deep  Submarine  Diving”  (1965),  “Prob- 
lems in  the  Theory  and  Application  of  Hydroacoustical 


203 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Sciences”  (1966),  and  “Use  of  Submarines  for  Scientific 
Purposes”  (Nauka  i Zhizn,  1969). 

12.  James  Oberg,  “The  Russian  Connection,”  Omni,  July 
1980. 

13.  Jacques  Vallee,  “Five  Arguments  Against  the  Extrater- 
restrial Origin  of  Unidentified  Flying  Objects,”  Journal 
of  Scientific  Exploration  4,  no.  1 (1990):  105-117. 

14.  “A  Football  Game  with  Aliens,”  Voronezh  Kommuna, 
3 October  1989. 

15.  “What  Was  It?”  Voronezh  Kommuna,  7 October  1989. 

16.  Izvestia,  12  October  1989. 

17.  Selskaya  Zhizn,  11  October  1989. 

18.  “They  Fly  . . . ,”  Molodoy  Kommunar,  12  October 
1989. 

19.  Meditsinskaya  Gazeta,  5 October  1989. 

20.  A.  V.  Zolotov,  Problema  Tunguskoi  Katastrophi  1908 
(Minsk:  Science  and  Technique,  1969). 

21.  Among  the  numerous  publications  in  English  about  the 
Tunguska  explosion,  see  Jack  Stovely,  Cauldron  of  Hell 
(London:  W.  H.  Allen/Starbook,  1977);  John  Baxter 
and  Thomas  Atkins,  The  Fire  Came  By  (New  York: 
Warner  Books,  1976);  and  Rupert  Furneaux,  The  Tun- 
g us  Event  (St.  Albans:  Panther/Granada,  1977). 

22.  Alexander  Kazantsev,  A Visitor  From  Outer  Space 
(Moscow:  Foreign  Languages  Publishing  House,  n.d.). 

23.  Felix  Zigel  was  the  author  of  numerous  scientific  arti- 
cles, notably  “Radio  Waves  From  Outer  Space”  ( Det - 
giz,  1963),  “Inhabitable  Worlds”  (Z nanie,  1962), 
“Nuclear  Explosion  Over  the  Taiga”  (Ananiy e-Sila, 
1961),  and  “Unusual  Galaxies”  (lun.  Tekh.,  1960),  as 
well  as  several  publications  for  science  and  astronomy 
teachers. 

24.  Henry  Gris  and  William  Dick,  Les  Nouveaux  Sorciers 
du  Kremlin  (Paris:  Tchou,  1979). 

25.  Ion  Hobana  and  Julien  Weverbergh,  Les  OVNI  en 
URSS  (Paris:  Robert  Laffont,  1976). 


204 


NOTES 


26.  Henry  Kamm,  “A  Soviet  Astronomer  Suggests  World 
Study  of  Flying  Saucers,”  New  York  Times,  10  Decem- 
ber 1967. 

27.  Based  on  an  interview  of  Vladimir  Krat  by  Ilya  Fon- 
yakov,  Literaturnaya  Gazeta,  26  July  1978,  13. 

28.  From  an  article  in  Nedelya  no.  3 (January  15-21, 

1979) :  8-9. 

29.  Alexander  Kazantsev  and  Jacques  Vallee,  “What  Is 
Flying  in  Our  Skies?”  Young  Technology  Magazine,  no. 
8 (1965)  and  Trud,  24  August  1967. 

30.  Jacques  Vallee,  The  Invisible  College  (New  York: 
E.  P.  Dutton,  1975). 

31.  Jacques  Vallee,  Messengers  oj  Deception  (Berkeley, 
Calif.:  And/Or  Press,  1979)  and  (New  York:  Bantam, 

1980) . 

32.  Historical  archives  collected  and  published  by  the  ar- 
chaeological commission,  part  IV,  St.  Petersburg,  1842. 

33.  Felix  Zigel,  Unidentified  Flying  Objects  in  the  USSR, 
privately  printed  (February  1968). 

34.  Rabochaya  Tribuna,  19  April  1990. 

35.  Emil  Bachurin,  Commentaries  on  “Passport  to  Ma- 
gonia,”  privately  printed  (1988). 

36.  A typical  photograph  of  the  northern  lights  (aurora  bo- 
realis) can  be  found  in  Sky  and  Telescope  (July  1990): 
105.  Taken  by  Pekka  Parviainen  of  Finland,  it  is  prac- 
tically identical  to  the  Novosti  photograph  of  alleged 
“energy  fields  in  the  Perm  region.” 

37.  See  John  Derr  and  Michael  Persinger,  “Luminous  En- 
ergy and  Seismic  Energy  in  the  Central  United  States,” 
Journal  of  Scientific  Exploration  4,  no.  1 (1990):  55; 
and  Paul  Devereux,  Earthlights  (Wellingborough: 
Turnstone  Press,  1982). 

38.  L.  M.  Gindilis,  D.  A.  Menkov,  and  I.  G.  Petrovskaya, 
“Observations  of  Anomalous  Atmospheric  Phenomena 
in  the  USSB:  Statistical  Analysis,”  USSB  Academy  of 
Sciences,  Institute  of  Space  Research  Report  PR  473 


205 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


(1979):  1-74.  Translated  by  NASA  as  Technical  Mem- 
orandum no.  75665  (February  1980). 

39.  Claude  Poher  and  Jacques  Vallee,  “Basic  Patterns  in 
UFO  Observations,”  AIAA  no.  75-42  (Paper  delivered 
at  the  Thirteenth  AIAA  Aerospace  Science  Meeting, 
Pasadena,  Calif.,  20  January  1975). 

40.  The  Law  of  the  Times  was  first  described  in  detail  in 
Challenge  to  Science  by  Jacques  and  Janine  Vallee 
(Chicago:  Regnery,  1966). 

41.  The  Flying  Saucer  Review  can  be  obtained  from:  P.O. 
Box  162,  High  Wycombe,  Bucks,  HP13  50Z,  England. 


206 


INDEX 


Abductions,  35-39,  176 
black  hands  cases,  148-50 
case  of  artist,  132-34 
cases  of,  36-39 
dialego  method,  39 
levitation  of  abductees,  36- 
37 

Perm  sightings,  142-43 
Soviet  study  of,  167,  179 
Academy  of  Sciences,  10 
Aetherius  Society,  7 
Agibalova,  Tatiana,  49 
Agibalova,  Valentina 

Alexeyevna,  45,  49 
Alexseichev,  I.,  45 
Aliens 

descriptions  of,  4,  11-13, 
37-38,  42-43,  47-49, 
54-55,  97,  144,  146-48 
language  of,  38 
taking  of  food  by,  143-45 
and  telepathic 

communication,  76, 
132-33 

witnesses’  reactions  to,  4 
All-Union  Society  for  the 
Propaganda  for 
Knowledge,  77,  180 
Apraksin,  Arkady,  137-38 
Arctic  Bridge  (Kazantev),  99 


Arnold,  Kenneth,  76 
Artsimovich,  Y.  A.,  77,  80 
Astapovich,  I.  S.,  69 
Astrology,  117—18 
Aura,  89 

Azhazha,  Vladimir,  23,  27- 
39,  45,  82,  134,  160, 
164,  174-75,  178,  180 

Bachurin,  Emil,  141-50 
Barinova,  Natasha,  36-37 
Bigby,  John,  102 
Bioenergy,  measurement  of, 
44 

Biolocation,  4,  9 
and  biological  fields,  88-94 
device  used,  88 
first  use  of,  96 
meaning  of,  5 
practical  applications,  94- 
96 

Soviet  attitude  towards, 
161-62,  180 
use  of,  44-45,  58-60 
Biological  fields,  88-94 
Black  hands  cases,  148-50 
Blazing  Island,  The 

(Kazantsev),  99 
Blinov,  Genya,  42,  46 
Blum,  Howard,  8 


207 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Bogert,  Carroll,  9 
Borisenko,  S.,  46 
Bova,  Ben,  7 
Brezhnev,  Leonid,  30 
Buslayev,  Eugene,  46 

Cabardino-Balcari  sighting,  32 
Castello,  Martine,  13-14,  19- 
20,  28,  60,  133,  160 
Castro,  Fidel,  82 
Center  for  UFO  studies,  8 
Challenge  to  Science,  170 
Chekhov  sighting,  95-96 
Cherepovetsk  sighting,  11 
Churinov,  Boris,  60 
Clark,  Jerome,  8 
Close  encounters,  categories 
of,  196-98 

Comet  theory,  Tunguska 
disaster,  66,  69-73 
Commentaries  on  “Passport  to 
Magonia”  (Bachurin), 
141,  148 

Commission  on  Anomalous 
Phenomena,  144,  149 
Committee  for  the  Scientific 
Investigation  of  Claims 
of  the  Paranormal,  7 
Committee  for  the  Study  of 

Anomalous  Phenomena, 
23 

Condon  committee,  80 
Condon,  Edward,  75 
Confrontations,  47-48 
Cooper,  Gordon,  110 
Cosmonauts,  sighting  of 
UFOs,  110 

Cosmonaut  training,  106-14 
City  of  Stars,  107 
parapsychological  methods 
in,  109-10 

space  station  for,  111-12 
Creighton,  Gordon,  149 
Crystals,  properties  of,  91 


Cuba,  sighting  in,  82-85 
Cults,  related  to  UFOs,  126- 
27 

Dalnegorsk  object,  103,  128 
Derr,  John,  151 
Devereux,  Paul,  151 
Dialego,  39 
Diamond,  Edwin,  10 
Dick,  William,  76-77 
Dimensions,  148 
Donin,  O.,  42 
Dowsing,  5,  46,  96 
rejection  by  scientific 
community,  161 
See  also  Biolocation 

Energy  fields,  151 

Flying  Saucer  Review,  180 
Flying  Saucers  (Menzel),  79 
Fomin,  Yuri,  75-78 
Food,  taken  by  aliens,  143-45 
Foreign  Broadcast  Information 
Service,  180-81 
Futurist  movement,  120-21 

Gagra  sighting,  138 
Gargarin,  Yuri,  113-14 
Genya,  17-23 
Geophysical  Institute,  4, 

61 

Glasnost,  5 

and  UFO  phenomena,  25 
Gris,  Henry,  76-77 
Gulisov,  V.  M.,  76 

Healers,  91,  93 
Healing  methods, 

homeopathy,  116-17 
Historical  view,  sightings 
through  history,  31, 

104,  157 
Hobana,  Ion,  79 


208 


INDEX 


Hynek,  J.  Allen,  79,  100,  155, 
196 

Illarionova,  Y.  T.,  45 
In  Search  of  the  Visitors,  178 
Institute  for  Space  Research, 
128 

Intelligent  signals,  from  space, 
79 

Invisible  College,  The,  123 
Ivanov,  Porphyry,  126-27 

Kahn,  Herman,  121 
Kamm,  Henry,  80 
Kazantsev,  Alexander,  72,  75, 
77-79,  82,  98-105,  160 
Kaznacheyev,  Vlail,  52,  156, 
159 

Keyhoe,  Major,  173 
Kiev  sighting,  37-39 
Kirov  sighting,  32 
Kolessov,  Eugene,  116 
Kolessov,  Larissa,  116,  179 
Kommuna,  52 
Konantsevo  sighting,  11 
Konin,  Alexis,  150 
Konnuna,  42-43 
Kopylov,  V.,  12 
Korovo  sighting,  12 
Krat,  Vladimir  Alexeyevich, 

84 

Kugatov,  V.  A.,  46 
Kulik,  Leonid,  69 
Kupriyanov,  L.  I.,  138-39 
Kurtz,  Paul,  7 

Lake  Onega  sighting,  137 
Language,  of  aliens,  38 
Law  of  the  Times,  169-70 
Lechkutsov,  Vladimir,  80 
Le  Figaro,  13-14 
Levchenko,  Y.,  46 
Levitation,  of  abductees,  36- 
37 


Libby,  William  F.,  70 
Lina,  Yuri,  168 
Lozovtsev,  Yuri,  41,  46,  54 
Lubnina,  O.,  12 
Lukin,  A.,  46 

Magalithic  sites,  89 
Magnetic  field,  measurement 
at  landing  site,  46-47, 
55-56,  58-59 
Makarov,  B.  V.,  76 
Malichev,  132-33 
Maltsev,  Igor,  139 
Maneuvers  and  flybys, 

categories  of,  198-99 
Mansi,  151 
Martinov,  D.,  80 
Martynov,  Vyacheslav,  41,  46, 
' 54,  57 

Masse,  Maurice,  151 
Media 

American,  5,  9-10,  30,  80 
Soviet,  5-6,  9,  12-13,  41, 

45,  76-77 

Meditsinskaya  Gazeta,  48 
Medvedev,  Lyubov,  12 
Menzel,  Donald,  77,  79-81, 
166 

Messengers  of  Deception,  126 
Metal,  from  UFOs,  101-02, 
137 

Michel,  Aime,  148 
Migulin,  Vladimir,  154-62 
Military 

investigations,  82-85,  160- 
61 

sightings  by,  28-30,  128-29, 
137-39 

Milyutenko,  Vladimir,  26-27, 
165 

Milyutin,  Valery,  48,  52 
Mitchell,  Edgar,  126 
Moliobka  sacred  site,  151 
Molodoy  Kommunar,  46 


209 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


Moscow  UFO  committee,  30 
Mosolov,  Alexander,  41,  46, 
53-54,  58 

Mousseaux,  Gougenot  des,  150 

Moustel,  E.,  80 

Mugulin,  Vladimir,  84,  86 

Nalchik  sighting,  36-37 
National  Center  for  Space 
Research,  11 

National  Space  Foundation,  7 
Nedelya,  84 

Negative  force,  zones  of,  92 
New  Earth  incident,  128 
Nicolayev  sightings,  36,  165 
Nikitina,  Inna  Vladimorovna, 
45,  49 

Northern  Jetty  (Kazantsev), 

99 

Novosti,  15,  17,  26,  28,  39, 
115 

Oberg,  James,  30 
Octobriski  sighting,  95 
Omni,  30 

Out  There  (Blum),  8 

Parapsychology 

and  cosmonaut  training, 
109-10 

study  in  Soviet  Union,  118— 
20 

Perm  region,  strange 

occurrences  of,  141-42 
Perm  sightings,  19,  22,  91 
abductions,  142-43 
photographs  of,  150-51, 
158-59 

and  psychic  phenomena, 
145-48 

sightings  over  time,  151-52 
witnesses,  142 
Petrosovotsk  sightings,  156 
Photographs,  19 


of  Perm  sightings,  150-51, 
158-59 

Platov,  Vladimir,  84,  155-56 
Plotnikov,  S.,  45 
Poher,  Claude,  169 
Poltergeists,  147 
Polyakov,  M.  N.,  50-52 
Polymorphism,  of  UFOs,  33, 
133,  171-72,  178 
Popovich,  Pavel,  30 
Pravda,  76-77,  80,  82 
Project  Blue  Book,  28,  180 
Prokoflyevna,  Vera,  37-38 
Proshin,  V.  V.,  149 
Provotkin,  Nicholas,  110 
Pugach,  Alexander,  38-39 
Pugatsch,  128 

Radiesthesia,  meaning  of,  5 
Radio-Engineering, 

Electronics,  and 
Communications 
Society,  41 
Remains  of  UFOs 

Dalnegorsk  object,  103,  128 
metal,  101-02,  137 
Soviet  explanation  of,  160 
Researchers,  illnesses  of,  23 
Robertovna,  Zinaida,  127 
Robots,  4,  42,  47 
Roboziero  sighting,  135-36 
Rocard,  Yves,  161 
Rosen,  Charlie,  168 
Rubtsov,  Vladimir,  173,  178 

Sagan,  Carl,  70-71 
Saitov,  R.,  12 
Sanarov,  Valeri,  173 
Secret  UFO  Chronicles 
fishermen  and  burning 
beams  case,  134-36 
Gagra  sighting,  138 
incident  of  the  artist,  132- 
34 


210 


INDEX 


Lake  Onega  sighting,  137 
military  pilot  case,  137-38 
Usovo  sighting,  139 
Selskaya  Zhizn,  45 
Semenchenko,  A.  A.,  139 
Semenov,  S.  B.,  68 
Sharoglazov,  G.,  12 
Shevchenko  sighting,  13 
Sholokhova,  Julia,  42 
Silanov,  Genrikh,  4,  11,  42- 
45,  58-59 

Sky  Without  Mystery,  The 
(Pugatsch),  128 
Socialist  Industry,  12 
Socorro,  New  Mexico,  13 
Soviet  UFOlogy,  74-86 
first  Soviet  sightings,  76 
founding  fathers,  75 
important  dates  in,  78 
modern  era,  82-86 
mythological/religious 
viewpoint,  173-74 
pioneers  in,  76-79 
publications,  75-76,  79 
Stoviarov  committee,  79-80 
Statues,  of  space  explorers, 

104 

Stepanova,  Alexandra,  37-38 
Stoliarov  committee,  75,  79- 
80,  104 

Stoliarov,  Porfiri,  79 
Stolyarov,  O.  V.,  52 
Sullivan,  Walter,  81 
Surin,  Vasya,  42,  46 
Sviridov,  Yuli  Nikanorovich, 
45,  49 

Tarantin,  Captain,  29 
Telepathic  communication, 
and  aliens,  76,  132-33 
“They  Came  from  Outer 

Space — Soviet  Editors 
Discover  the  Power  of 
Tabloids,”  9 


Tikhonov,  Arkadi,  79,  81 
Time 

distribution  for  sightings, 
31-32 

duration  for  sightings,  31- 
32 

nature  of,  93 

“Truth  About  Flying  Saucers,” 
76-77 
Tsander,  102 

Tsekhanovich,  Ludmilla,  138 
Tsiolkovsky,  Konstantin,  52, 
102,  167-68 

Tunguska  disaster,  62-73,  99, 
102-03 

comet  theory,  66,  69-73 
events  of,  64 
evidence  in,  64-68 
investigation  of,  68-70 
witnesses,  68 
Turgay  sighting,  127 
Twenty-first  Century  Group, 
60 

“UFO  and  Ufonauts  in  the 
Light  of  Folklore” 
(Sanarov),  173 

UFOlogy.  See  Soviet  UFOlogy 
UFOs 

beginning  of  Soviet  study 
of,  27-33 

catalog  of  Soviet  sightings 
(appendix)  182-95 
chronicles.  See  Secret  UFO 
Chronicles 

close  encounter  categories, 
196-98 

cults  of,  126-27 
descriptions  of,  12-13,  32- 
34,  38,  42-43,  46,  50- 
51,  84,  95,  127,  137-38 
history  of  sightings,  31,  104, 
157 

insignia  on,  13,  60-61 


211 


UFO  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION 


UFOs,  (continued) 
institute  for  study  of,  174- 
75 

and  Law  of  the  Times,  169- 
71 

maneuvers  and  flybys, 
categories  of,  198-99 
metal  from,  101-02,  137 
objects  mistaken  as,  10 
polymorphism  of,  33,  133, 
171-72,  178 

remains  of.  See  Remains  of 
UFOs 

sightings  by  military,  28-30, 
128-29,  137-39 
Soviet  arguments  against, 
154-62 

Soviet  exhibit  of,  125-28 
Soviet  statistics  on,  169-74 
Soviet  symposium  on,  164- 
69 

SVP  credibility  rating,  199- 
200 

terrestrial  theory  of,  122, 
167-69 

time  distribution  for 
sightings,  31-32 
time  duration  for  sightings, 
169 

underwater  objects,  28-29 
weight  of,  56 

UMMO  symbol,  13-14,  60-61 

Underwater  UFOs,  28-29 

Unidentified  Flying  Objects  in 
the  Union  of  Soviet 
Socialist  Republics 
(Zigel),  75-76 

University  of  Colorado,  75,  81 

Usovo  sighting,  139 

Vega,  71 

Venado  Tureto  sighting,  47- 
48 


Ventura,  Isidro  Puentes,  82- 
85 

Veselova,  I.,  11 
Veynik,  Professor,  84 
Vilenskaya,  Larissa,  119 
Vokhrimenko,  Yuri  Petrovich, 
48 

Volga  sighting,  29 
Vologda  sighting,  11-12,  34 
Voronezh  collective,  40-41 
Voronezh  sightings,  4-11,  13, 
19 

events  of,  41-45 
investigation  of,  44-47,  53- 
61 

and  melted  asphalt,  175 
methods  of  investigation, 
54-58 

paralyzing  ray  event,  50- 
52 

physical  evidence,  55-57 
Soviet  explanation  of,  159- 
60 

types  of  entities  seen,  47- 
51 

witnesses,  42-43,  45-54, 
57-58 

Weverbergh,  Julien,  79 
Whipple,  F.  J.  W.,  69 
Witches,  killing  of,  118— 

19 

Witnesses,  32 
abduction  of,  35-39 

Yatsunov,  B.  G.,  42 
Yerenin  sighting,  127 

Zigel,  Felix,  70,  72,  75,  77- 
80,  82,  137 

Zolotov,  Alexis,  19,  61,  63-73, 
87-97, 100-02 
Zudov,  Valentin,  108 


212 


Dr.  Jacques  Vallee,  a former  principal  investi- 
gator on  Department  of  Defense  computer  net- 
working projects,  was  born  in  France,  where  he 
was  trained  in  astrophysics.  He  moved  to  the 
United  States  in  1962  and  received  his  Ph.D.  in 
computer  science  in  1967  from  Northwestern 
University,  where  he  was  a close  associate  of  the 
late  Dr.  J,  Allen  Hynek.  The  author  of  numerous 
articles  and  three  books  about  high  technology, 
Dr.  Vallee  first  became  interested  in  the  subject 
of  UFOs  when  he  witnessed  the  destruction  of 
tracking  tapes  of  unknown  objects  at  a major 
observatory.  His  research  into  the  phenomenon 
has  taken  him  to  many  places  in  the  U.S.  and  to 
many  countries  around  the  world,  including 
France,  Scotland,  Australia,  Argentina,  and 
Brazil.  His  unique  approach  to  this  phenomenon 
was  crystallized  when  he  served  as  the  real-life 
model  for  the  character  of  the  French  scientist 
played  by  Francois  Truffaut  in  Steven  Spielberg’s 
film  Close  Encounters  of  the  Third  Kind. 

Dr.  Vallee  lives  in  San  Francisco  with  his  wife 
and  two  children. 


Jacket  design  by  William  Geller 
Jacket  photograph  U.S.  Naval  Observatory 
Printed  in  USA 
3/92 

Ballantine  Books 
New  York,  N.Y.  10022 


JERRY  BAUER 


CLOSE  ENCOUNTERS  IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION 

Over  thirty  people  have  witnessed  the  landings  in  Voronezh,  thousands  have  seen  the 

objects  in  flight.” 

Alexei  Mosolov 
Aircraft  Engineer 

“UFO  abductions  have  become  especially  common  during  1989;  so  common  that  we 
believe  we  have  now  identified  the  mechanism  of  these  events." 
Professor  Vladimir  Azhazha 
Moscow,  January  1990 

‘Suddenly  a light  appeared,  not  very  bright,  trembling  and  flickering.  The  beam  came 
down  and  it  slowly  moved  along  the  ground  toward  us.  It  seemed  strange  that  the 
surface  touched  by  the  ray  was  full  of  bluish  sparkles,  and  everything  was 
quivering  as  if  one  was  in  a haze  on  a hot  day... when  the  beam  approached  the  car 
I experienced  an  unpleasant  feeling  of  fear  and  loss  of  self-confidence.” 
Voronezh  worker  M.N.  Polyakov 
September  1989 

“On  September  27  [1989],  at  about  7:00  pm  I was  walking  in  the  area  of  the  park. 

Suddenly  I noticed  a luminous  ball  sweeping  past  on  a northerly  course  at 
an  extraordinary  speed,  strictly  horizontally  at  an  altitude  of  roughly  200  meters. 

I estimated  its  diameter  to  be  about  15  meters.” 

Lieutenant  Sergei  Malveyev 
Voronezh  Militia 


ISBN  D-34S-373Tb-0 


